The Twente Lower Extremity Model


  Consistent Dynamic Simulation of the

     Human Locomotor Apparatus




        Martijn D. Klein Horsman
De promotiecommissie is als volgt samengesteld:

Voorzitter en Secretaris:
Prof. dr. F. Eising                                                 Universiteit Twente
Promotoren:
Prof. dr. F.C.T. van der Helm                                       Universiteit Twente
Prof. dr. ir. H.F.J.M. Koopman                                      Universiteit Twente
Leden:
Prof. dr. ir. J. Rasmussen                                          Aalborg University
Prof. dr. J.H. van Dieen                                            Vrije Universiteit
Dr. H.E.J. Veeger                                                   Vrije Universiteit
Prof. dr. S.K. Bulstra                                              UMC Groningen
Prof. dr. ir. J.B. Jonker                                           Universiteit Twente
Prof. dr. ir. N. Verdonschot                                        Universiteit Twente




Nederlandse titel: ‘Het Twentse Onderste Extremiteiten Model: Consistente Dynamische Simulatie van
het Menselijke Bewegingsapparataat’

The publication of this thesis is financially supported by:
Anna Fonds, Leiden
Xsens Motion Technologies, Enschede
Twente Medical Systems International
Anybody




Printed by Gildeprint Drukkerijen, Enschede, The Netherlands

Cover: Anatomical drawing of the lower extremity by Leonardo da Vinci.
Da Vinci gained his knowledge of the musculature by dissection of the human body.
Cover design: Geerieke Klein Horsman-Ridderikhof



©Martijn Klein Horsman, The Netherlands, 2007
No parts of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of the holder of the copyright.
ISBN 978-90-365-2602-9
THE TWENTE LOWER EXTREMITY MODEL


  CONSISTENT DYNAMIC SIMULATION OF THE

      HUMAN LOCOMOTOR APPARATUS




                       Proefschrift


                       ter verkrijging van
       de graad van doctor aan de Universiteit Twente
              op gezag van de rector magnificus,
                     prof. dr. W.H.M. Zijm,
      volgens het besluit van het College voor Promoties
                 in het openbaar te verdedigen
          op vrijdag 21 december 2007 om 15:00 uur

                            door

                Martijn Dirk Klein Horsman
                 geboren op 11 mei 1979
                         te Rijssen
Dit proefschrift is goedgekeurd door promotoren:
Prof. dr. F.C.T. van der Helm
Prof. dr. ir. H.F.J.M. Koopman
‘There are only two ways to live your life: One is as though nothing is a miracle.
The other is as if everything is. I believe in the latter.’

                                                                  Albert Einstein
Contents

Chapter 1      Introduction                                                   9

Chapter 2      Morphological muscle and joint parameters for
               Musculoskeletal modelling of the lower extremity             27

Chapter 3      The Twente Lower Extremity Model:
               comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature         45

Chapter 4      The Twente Lower Extremity Model:
               comparison of maximal isometric moment with the literature   65

Chapter 5      Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach
               for the lower extremity                                      81

Chapter 6      Relation between proximal femur deformities and
               paralysis of hip abductors in children with
               myelomeningocele                                             99

Chapter 7      General discussion                                           121

Appendix                                                                    139

Summary                                                                     149

Samenvatting                                                                153

Dankwoord                                                                   157

About the Author                                                            159
               Chapter 1




Introduction
Introduction                                                                               11




1.1       Introduction

Humans are able to perform an almost infinite variety of motor tasks. Either running a
marathon or playing the piano; every movement is the result of a well controlled
interaction between the central nervous system and the musculoskeletal system. By
generating the appropriate amount of force in the more than 600 available muscles we are
able to rotate and translate more than 200 bones in our body. This gives us the ability to do
our work, express ourselves and affect our environment. The redundancy of the
musculoskeletal system allows the central nervous system to choose the most optimal
combination of muscles for its performance, making the human locomotor apparatus a
highly flexible and efficient system.
Capabilities of the neuromusculoskeletal system may be heavily restricted when a disease or
a trauma engenders eminent dysfunctions of certain parts of the system. As a result one
may experience serious movement limitations in daily living. A clear example is the damage
in hip muscle nerves causing a disordered gait in spina bifida patients. Depending on the
level of the lesion, hip extensors and abductors like gluteus maximus are weakened and
unable to generate the required amount of force. To compensate for this deficiency the hip
is abducted and the pelvis laterally rotated, a so-called Trendelenburg gait (Duffy et al.,
1996) (figure 1). Although quantitative evidence is lacking, this muscle imbalance is
believed to cause observed deformities in the neck of the femur. In 86% of the children
with a lesion at L3 and 45% of children with a lesion at L4 these deformities will result in
hip dislocations and accompanying movement disorders (Fraser et al., 1992). Equinus gait,
as observed in cerebral palsy and stroke patients, is another example how disturbed muscle
function results in a movement disorder. Spastic or stiff plantar flexors cause extreme
plantar flexion of the ankle, complicating a normal walking pattern (Knutsson and
Richards, 1979).
Orthopedic interventions such as tendon transfers or tendon lengthening are common
treatments to compensate deficiencies in the musculoskeletal system. These adaptations are
aimed to improve muscle function and mobility. For example, posterior iliopsoas tendon
transfer to the greater trochanter, aiming to reinforce hip abductor capacity and improve
walking potential of spina bifida patients (Sharrard, 1964) (figure 1). Another example is the
lengthening of the Achilles tendon in order to reduce spasticity in the plantar flexors of
cerebral palsy and stroke patients (Root et al., 1987).
Although tendon transfer and lengthening have shown to be successful, there are still many
cases in which results were less satisfactory. Dysfunctions remained or worsened due to
inadequate lengthening of the muscle tendon complex or an insufficient muscle moment
arm of a transferred tendon (e.g. (Duffy et al., 1996, Carroll and Sharrard, 1972)). These
cases show that the mechanical properties of the musculoskeletal system are too complex
to make an accurate prediction of the outcome of an orthopedic intervention without a
12                                                                                                   Chapter 1



thorough biomechanical analysis. To assist clinicians, an interactive numerical tool would
be useful that allows evaluation of if-then scenarios with respect to an intervention. With
such a tool a surgeon could pre-operatively simulate if the planned adaptation of the
morphology of the patient will have the desired effect. Besides, it can provide relevant
insight in the cause of deficiencies in order to improve treatments. Musculoskeletal models
have a high potential to serve as such a tool (Erdemir et al., 2007). These models and their
applications will be further introduced and expounded in the next paragraph.




Figure 1 Spina bifida patient with a classic Trendelenburg gait (Duffy (1996)). An example of how deficiencies in
the neuromusculoskeletal system affect human locomotion. On the right side the tendon transfer as proposed by
Sharrard (1964) aiming to enforce hip abduction capacity and improve walking potential in spina bifida patients.



1.2        Musculoskeletal modeling

The Oxford English Dictionary describes a model as: ‘a simplified mathematical
description of a system or process, used to assist calculations and predictions’. In a
musculoskeletal model the morphology of muscles, joints and bones is numerically
represented with a set of anatomical parameters in order to investigate and quantify
musculoskeletal interaction.
In its simplest form, the muscle is described as a straight line of action between origin and
insertion and the joint articulation with a fixed center of rotation. With the defined
geometry the moment arm vector of the muscle element can be calculated. By attributing
force generating properties to the element, maximal force and torque can be calculated as
an important measure to quantify mechanical properties of musculoskeletal system.
Introduction                                                                              13



1.2.1     Lower extremity musculoskeletal models

A wide variety of models have been developed and described in the literature to study
human movement (see reviews (Pandy, 2001, Zajac, 1989)). This paragraph gives an
overview of existing models. A distinction is made on two levels: the comprehensiveness of
anatomical model parameters and the approach to solve the equations of motion.

In most models the representation of the anatomy has been greatly reduced. Typically the
human locomotion apparatus was represented in 2D with only a few joints and torque
generating elements representing the passive and/or active contributions of muscles and
ligaments. These models have provided relevant insight in principles of motion and control
(e.g. (Verdaasdonk et al., 2005, van der Kooij et al., 1999, Pandy and Berme, 1988)), yet
cannot be used to study the role of a specific muscle in a movement, since individual
muscles are not implemented.
On the other side of the spectrum the morphology of muscles, joints and bones is much
more realistically represented in the model. These comprehensive musculoskeletal models
consist of an extensive set of musculotendon actuators describing the force generating
properties and the path of the muscle with respect to the joint. Joints with multiple degrees
of freedom are included to simulate the motion in 3D (e.g. (Anderson and Pandy, 1999,
Heller et al., 2001, Delp et al., 1990, Neptune et al., 2004)). In the study of Anderson and
Pandy (1999), human movement was described in a model that consists of 54 muscle
elements and 10 body segments. These comprehensive models can be used to investigate
individual muscles, which is a condition to address clinical questions as described in the
previous paragraph. Delp et al. (1990) studied the effect of a transfer and lengthening of
the Achilles tendon by adjusting model parameters according to surgical techniques.
Another example of a clinical application is a study in which the length of the
musculotendon complex of the hamstrings and iliopsoas was estimated in a
musculoskeletal model of cerebral palsy patients as an important parameter to predict the
biomechanical effect of a surgical intervention (Arnold et al., 2000). Software packages
have been developed to define the anatomy, do simulations and visualize results of
comprehensive musculoskeletal models (figure 2). SIMM (Software for Interactive
Musculoskeletal Modeling), developed in early 90’s, was the first graphics based software
for development and analysis of musculoskeletal models (Delp and Loan, 1995, Delp et al.,
1990). This piece of software has been used by many researchers in the past years (e.g.
(Thelen et al., 2003b, Higginson et al., 2006, Anderson and Pandy, 2001). Another more
recently developed package is the Anybody Modeling System (Anybody Technology A/S,
Aalborg, Denmark). Anybody has been used for estimation of muscle forces and joint
contact force (e.g. (de Zee et al., 2007)).
14                                                                                                 Chapter 1




Figure 2 Representation of muscles of the lower extremity in SIMM (left) and Anybody software. Location of the
origins and insertions of the muscles are based on cadaver measurements of Brand (1982).


A second distinction in the wide range of models in the literature can be made in the
approach to solve the equations of motion. In the first, the inverse dynamic approach, the
motion of segments and external forces are inputs for the model. Generally in gait analysis,
these inputs are collected using a motion analysis system (e.g. Vicon, Optotrak) which
measures 3D position of markers on bony landmarks on body segments. Force plates
mounted in the floor of the lab collect ground reaction force during foot contact. With a
linked segment model defining position and axes of the joints and inertial properties of the
segments (e.g. (Chandler et al., 1975, Koopman et al., 1995)), torques with respect to the
joints can be calculated. Subsequently, when muscles are defined in the model, muscle
force can be determined given the moment arm of the muscle lines. If the number of
muscles is more than mechanically necessary, an optimization is required to share the
determined joint torque over the defined muscle elements. In most cases, muscle force is
optimized by minimizing a force related objective function, such as the sum of muscle
forces or (squared) muscle stresses (Erdemir et al., 2007, Tsirakos et al., 1997). To
determine the most optimal combination of muscle forces, a muscle force is imposed
between physiological boundaries (typically zero and maximal force per muscle). Inverse
muscle models, defining contraction and excitation dynamics, are used to estimate the
required neural input for a given muscle force. The reviews by Erdemir et al. (2007) and
Tsirakos et al. (1997) give an extensive overview of existing inverse dynamic models.
In the forward dynamic approach, muscle activation patterns or muscle forces are used as
input for the equations of motion, resulting in joint torques and motion of the segments.
As for the inverse approach, muscle forces are optimized to deal with the redundancy of
the system. In some models muscle forces are optimized such that the difference between
simulated and measured kinematics is minimal (e.g. (Thelen et al., 2003a)); other models
Introduction                                                                             15



maximize the performance (e.g. jump height in (Anderson and Pandy, 1999)). Due to
integration of the equations of motion, a forward dynamic simulation is much more time
consuming than the inverse calculation. Depending on the model complexity, convergence
of the system to a solution can take days or even weeks on a modern computer.



1.2.2     Anatomical datasets

The outcome of a musculoskeletal model is highly dependent on the quality of its building
blocks, the anatomical model parameters. The geometry specified in these dataset defines
the path of the musculotendon complex during a movement. The corresponding moment
arms affect the relation between motion of the segments and force in the muscles. Force
generating properties such as optimal fiber length, physiological cross sectional area
(PCSA), pennation angle and tendon length specify the maximal amount of force in the
muscle (figure 3).
In the 19th century muscle properties like muscle mass (Fick and Weber, 1877, Bischoff,
1863, Theile, 1884) and PCSA (Weber, 1851) have been collected in dissected cadavers in
order to quantify force generating characteristics of a muscle. This path was continued
throughout the 20th century and until today the mapping of the musculoskeletal system
with measurable quantities is still an area of great interest and challenge for many
researchers. In the past decades researchers collected musculotendon parameters in
cadaveric specimens (see for an overview (Yamaguchi et al., 1990)). The survey of
Yamaguchi described 23 datasets, 13 represent parts of the lower extremity (e.g. (Brand and
Crowinshield, 1982, Wickiewicz et al., 1983, Friederich and Brand, 1990). The most
extensive and frequently used generic datasets (Delp et al., 1990, Pierrynowski, 1995) were
constructed by merging several existing sources. Delp et al. (1990) used 4 different sources
and Pierrynowsky (1995) merged 10 previously reported datasets. In the past years using
the increasing accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) several researchers have
collected several specific anatomical parameters. Hamstring and adductor moment arms
were measured using MRI in cerebral palsy patients (Arnold et al., 2000). More recently
muscle volumes of upper limb muscles were measured in healthy subjects using MRI
(Holzbaur et al., 2007).
16                                                                                                   Chapter 1




Figure 3 On the left a schematic drawing of the force-length curve of two different muscles with identical muscle
mass but different PCSA. On the right a schematic drawing of the force-length curve of two different muscles
with identical PCSA but different fiber length (Lieber and Friden, 2001).



1.2.3      Muscle models

Many muscle models have been reported in the literature. A muscle model aims to describe
mechanical interactions of the different parts within the muscle to get more insight in
muscle functioning. Three different types of models are described below. A distinction can
be made in the way the morphology is represented.

Hill model
The Hill model represents dynamic properties of a muscle based on experimental
observations of controlled muscle inputs and outputs (muscle length, load and stimulation)
(Hill, 1938). The model consists of a contractile element which represents the active force
generating properties of the muscle and elastic elements to represent the passive muscle
structures. A series elastic element represents the contributions of the tendon, aponeuroses
and stretch of the cross-bridges connecting the myofilaments; a parallel elastic element
represents the passive connective tissue parallel to the contractile element. The model as
proposed by Hill has been extended through the years by including several other aspects
such as visco-elastic properties and activation dynamics (e.g. (Hatze, 1981)). The Hill model
is suitable for implementation in the comprehensive musculoskeletal models that have been
mentioned earlier. It accurately describes the relation between muscle force and the states
of the muscle (length, velocity, activation) in a computationally efficient way. Since it is a
descriptive lumped parameter model, a Hill model cannot be used to study microscopic
processes in the muscle.

Cross-bridge model
A cross-bridge model, also known as a Huxley model, describes the dynamics of a muscle
on the level of the cross-bridges (Huxley, 1957). The model is based on an assumed
Introduction                                                                               17



probability of attachment and detachment of the myosin head to the actin filament as a
function of the stretch in the myosin head. Using the stiffness of the cross-bridges and the
length distribution of the cross-bridge population, the force in each filament can be
determined in time, which sums up to the total muscle force. This model resulted in a good
fit with experimental force velocity curves and is therefore suitable to study muscle force
transitions. Yet, the force-length relation and activation dynamics are not described. This in
combination with the very high computational burden makes these models thus far
unsuitable for implementation in comprehensive musculoskeletal models.

Morphological model
Morphological muscle models include morphological aspects of the muscle such as
aponeuroses and fiber orientation. These models aim to predict the muscle deformation
and the isometric muscle force given the muscle length. An example is a planimetric model
which is based on the assumption that a muscle has a constant muscle area (2D model) or
volume (3D model) during contraction. With the optimal fiber length and pennation angle
the force-length characteristics of the muscle can be determined (Woittiez et al., 1984).
Finite element models have been developed to represent morphological structures and
their mechanical interactions in more mechanical detail. These models allow investigation
of the interactions of specific structures within the muscle, for example the force
transmission between inter- and intramuscular fascia (Yucesoy et al., 2002). Parameters in
this model have been determined in experimental studies in rats. In other studies the shape
of the muscles was included in the finite element models based on MRI (e.g. (Oomens et
al., 2003, Blemker and Delp, 2005). A comprehensive musculoskeletal model consisting of
muscles which are modeled according this finite elements approach have not been reported
in the literature as experimental data is lacking and the computational load is too high.



1.2.4     A musculoskeletal model to assist in orthopedic surgery

Alterations in the anatomy of the subject as a result of orthopedic interventions can be
implemented in a realistic musculoskeletal model by adapting corresponding anatomical
model parameters. For example, by changing the 3D position of a tendon attachment on a
body segment, a tendon transfer can be implemented. Inverse dynamic simulation of the
adapted model shows the effect of virtual interventions on muscle forces, joint forces and
muscle activations, under the assumption that the pre-operatively measured input motion
of the segments is unchanged after surgery. A forward dynamic simulation allows the
clinician to predict the altered movements of a patient after surgery. Activation patterns of
the muscles during gait, determined pre-operatively in an inverse analysis, can be used as
input to predict the movement of the segments after the intervention (see figure 4). This
approach assumes that activation patterns are unchanged after surgery.
18                                                                                                      Chapter 1




                  SURGICAL      Inverse simulations                       SURGICAL
                  INTERVENTIONS                                           INTERVENTIONS

                                          Fmin, Fmax
                                                                            Inverse               Predicted
INPUT:
                    Musculo                            Load       Fmus      muscle
Measured                         Moment arm(d)                                                    •muscle
                    skeletal                           sharing              model
kinematics                                                                                        activation
                    geometry                                                  CE    SE
                                Joint torques(M)
                                                                                   PE             •joint load


                                              SURGICAL                    SURGICAL
                                              INTERVENTIONS               INTERVENTIONS


                                                                            Forward
                            Predicted
                                                       Musculo              muscle
                            •kinematics                skeletal             model
                                                       geometry    Fmus       CE    SE
                            •joint load
                                                                                   PE



                                                  Forward simulations


Figure 4 Surgical interventions implemented in the model allow pre-operative analysis of treatment methods. The
inputs in the model are pre-operatively measured kinematics of a patient. In the boxes with thick black borders
model parameters can be adapted to describe an intervention, such as muscle attachment sites as defined in the
musculoskeletal geometry or tendon length in the muscle model. The grey boxes show relevant model outputs to
evaluate the result of implemented surgery. With inverse simulations the result of an intervention on the activation
patterns of the muscles can be evaluated. In a forward simulation the movement can be predicted and evaluated.




1.2.5      Shortcomings in current musculoskeletal models

Several studies have already been reported in which musculoskeletal models were utilized
to address clinical questions (e.g. estimation of muscle lengths in CP patients (Arnold et al.,
2001)). Yet, to develop an extensive clinical tool as pictured in figure 4, many challenges
have to be overcome. Three shortcomings in the current models hamper a successful
application:
     1) The inaccurate mapping of the mechanical properties of the musculoskeletal
          system;
     2) The lack of validation of the model outputs;
     3) Unrealistic optimization approach to deal with the redundancy of the
          musculoskeletal system.

These three issues will be further illuminated below.
Introduction                                                                             19



1) Mapping of mechanical properties of the musculoskeletal system

For successful clinical application, a musculoskeletal model should accurately represent the
mechanical properties of the investigated subject. Discrepancies between model and
subject lead to inaccurate model outputs and incorrect conclusions about the functioning
of the subject’s locomotor apparatus.
Several studies have been reported in which certain model parameters were collected
directly from magnetic resonance images (MRI) of a subject (e.g. hamstring and adductor
moment arms in patients with cerebral palsy (Arnold et al., 2000) or muscle volumes of
upper limb muscles in healthy subjects (Holzbaur et al., 2007)). Yet to date, in vivo
measurement of a complete and accurate dataset on a subject has been found
impracticable. For example sarcomere length, an important parameter required to derive
optimal fiber length and corresponding force-length characteristics, is immeasurable in
MRI. Other muscle properties are hard to recognize, such as broad muscle attachment sites
with fibers attaching directly to the bone (e.g. gluteus maximus). It is impossible to
compute important clinical biomechanical measures like joint compression forces and
muscle forces with an anatomical dataset based on these imaging methods.
To construct a comprehensive musculoskeletal model (e.g. (Glitsch and Baumann, 1997,
Anderson and Pandy, 2001, Delp et al., 1990, Heller et al., 2001) generic anatomical
datasets are required. The available dataset have two shortcomings.
The first shortcoming is the incompleteness of existing anatomical datasets ((Brand and
Crowinshield, 1982, Wickiewicz et al., 1983, Friederich and Brand, 1990). For example,
Wickiewicz et al. (1983) reported sarcomere length of 27 muscles of the lower extremity
together with other muscle parameters. Yet, this is only a part of the total number of
muscles acting on the lower extremity. Other important parameters such as joint
parameters and muscle attachment sites are absent. Brand et al. (1982) reported muscle
attachment sites but lacked for example optimal fiber lengths of the corresponding
muscles. Moreover, several parameters have never been measured in any dataset, for
example to describe curving of several muscles around intervening structures or to
determine the joint angle at which a muscle fiber is at optimal length. In sum, one complete
dataset to construct a comprehensive musculoskeletal model is lacking. To obtain a
complete set of parameters, different datasets had to be merged and the missing parameters
guessed (e.g. (Delp et al., 1990)). This is done such that model outputs like maximal
isometric joint moments are in agreement with in vivo data. However, a good fit does not
necessary mean an accurate representation of the individual muscle properties as more
combinations of muscle forces can produce the same joint torque. Since the effect of
scaling and estimation is uncertain, inaccuracies and inconsistencies are inevitable. The
resulting dataset represents an anatomical configuration that never existed in which
(unknown) interactions between different anatomical parameters are lost, or new
interactions are created.
20                                                                                   Chapter 1



The second shortcoming of the available generic anatomical datasets is the inaccurate
discretization of the human locomotor apparatus. Large reductions of the actual
morphology cause errors in model output. The mechanical effect of a muscle is often
described with only 1 (or in some cases maximal 3) muscle element(s) (Brand and
Crowinshield, 1982). However, when a muscle consists of 1 element a muscle can only
exert a force to segment. In reality a muscle with fibers attaching directly to the bone (e.g.
Soleus) can exert combinations of pulling forces resulting in a torque to the bone. For
accurate description of muscles with large attachments sites typically a minimum of 6
muscles is required to describe the mechanical effect of the muscle sufficiently accurate
(Van der Helm and Veenbaas, 1991). Furthermore, an insufficient number of muscle
elements in a load sharing results in unrealistic equilibration of the external moments.
When more elements are defined, only certain parts of the muscle may be activated to
avoid unwanted moments with respect to other joint axes. These differentiations within a
muscle are not represented with only one muscle element. This results in too high forces in
the available muscle elements and too high joint reaction forces (e.g. (Glitsch and
Baumann, 1997)). Finally, many muscles that curve around intervening structures are
inaccurately represented. These muscles are defined as straight muscle element which
results in inaccuracies in muscle moment arm, length and velocity; important parameters
for estimation of muscle force. Delp et al. (1990) included ‘via points’ to compensate this
shortcoming, yet these model parameters are not based on direct anatomical
measurements. When a muscle can freely shift over a bone, this results in an inaccurate
description of the muscle moment arm when joint angles are varied.

2) Validation

The validation of a model is important to evaluate if the model accuracy fits with the
requirements. Yet the available sources for validation are very limited. Typically, to increase
resemblance with the subject a generic model is scaled by fitting the bony landmarks of a
subject to the bony landmarks defined in the model. Subsequently, the model parameters
are proportionally scaled, with the same ratios as the segments. However, the scaling of
internal parameters, which are invisible from the outside such as sarcomere length or
tendon slack length, is based on assumptions that are unverifiable. The accuracy of these
model parameters is unknown. Direct measurement of force in the muscles is impractical
so the direct validation of optimized muscle forces is impossible. EMG and in vivo
measured joint compression forces are used for the evaluation of the validity of estimated
muscle force. Yet these measures are indirect and limited available.

3) Optimization of muscle force

The accuracy of muscle forces determined with a musculoskeletal model, and thus a
successful model application, is highly dependent on the optimization procedure. To
Introduction                                                                                21



investigate the function of a specific muscle during a certain motor task, it is important that
the correct amount of force is attributed to the muscle.
There are two shortcomings in existing methods which cause inaccuracies in the load
sharing. Firstly, in many models a muscle force is bounded between zero and a static
maximal force based on muscle PCSA (Glitsch and Baumann, 1997, Crowninshield and
Brand, 1981, Heller et al., 2001). Yet, in reality excitation and activation dynamics bound
the transitions in muscle force. Excluding of muscle dynamics in the boundaries allows
unrealistic muscle force transitions in which a muscle force instantaneously switches
between zero and maximal force or visa versa. A second shortcoming is concerned with
the cost function used to estimate the muscle force. Many models minimize mechanical
cost functions which are based on muscle force (e.g. minimization of the sum of muscle
force or the sum of squared muscle stresses; see for an overview (Erdemir et al., 2007)).
However, there is no proven relation between these cost functions and the actual
distribution of forces over the different muscles. With these mechanical cost functions
muscles with large moment arms and large PCSAs are preferred. Small muscles with short
fibers and moment arm do not contribute, resulting in unrealistic synergies (Praagman et
al., 2006).

In summary, it is likely that a physiologically more realistic optimization approach in
combination with accurate and consistent model parameters will result in a more accurate
estimation of muscle force. This will make the use of a clinical tool as described in figure 4
more feasible.



1.3       Historical framework of this thesis

In 1990 the Laboratory of Biomechanical Engineering was founded at the University of
Twente. From the start, gait analysis and musculoskeletal modeling has been an important
line of research in the laboratory. This line was initiated with the PhD thesis of Koopman
who developed a 3D linked segment model for reconstruction of measured kinematics and
analysis of human gait (Koopman, 1989). Thunnissen continued this path and developed a
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity based on the dataset of Brand et al. (1982)
consisting of 47 muscle elements (Thunnissen, 1993). The model was used to estimate
muscle forces during gait. It was concluded that more accurate anatomical parameters like
physiological cross sectional areas and force-length properties were required for further
enhancement of muscle force estimation. Van Der Belt (1997) made the step towards
forward model simulations. Optimal control was used to simulate walking in the sagittal
plane in a linked segment model with active and passive components in the joints (Van der
Belt, 1997). In the next years several researchers in the group worked on the modeling of
the individual muscles (Yucesoy, 2003, Van der Linden, 1998, Meijer, 1998). Van Der Kooij
22                                                                                     Chapter 1



(2003) compared muscle forces estimated with the dataset of Brand (1982) and Pierrynowksi
(1995) and came, in agreement with Thunnissen (1993), to the conclusion that a more refined
dataset is needed. The methodology as used in the Delft Shoulder and Elbow model was
suggested (van der Helm, 1994). In this model muscles with large attachment sites are defined
with multiple muscle elements. Besides, curved muscle elements are used to describe curving
of muscles around bony contours. This resulted in an accurate representation of the
mechanical effect of shoulder muscles.
Therefore, the next step in the line of research is the collection of a more accurate anatomical
dataset. This dataset allows the construction of a new and comprehensive musculoskeletal
model in which morphology is accurately defined. This will improve muscle force estimation,
which is an important condition for future clinical model applications.



1.4      Thesis aim and outline

The goal of this study is to develop and validate a comprehensive inverse-forward dynamic
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity based on an accurate and consistent
anatomical dataset aiming to evaluate if-then scenarios with respect to the treatment of gait
disorders.

Chapter 2 describes the collection of a consistent anatomical dataset of lower extremity
measured on a male embalmed specimen. In Chapter 3 the Twente Lower Extremity Model
(TLEM) is presented. This comprehensive musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity
model is unique since it is fully based on one measured dataset. Muscle moment arms are
calculated and compared with the literature in order to validate the geometry defined in the
model. Together with the measured force generating properties, the maximal isometric
moments can be calculated. In chapter 4 this model output is compared with maximal
voluntary contractions reported in literature as a next and important step in the validation of
the model. In chapter 5 the dynamic properties of the model are validated. A novel inverse-
forward dynamic optimization and energy related cost function was utilized to solve the load
sharing problem. This optimization method includes a forward dynamic muscle model to
account for muscle dynamics. Calculated neural outputs are compared with EMG and
calculated joint compression forces are compared with in vivo measurements as described in
the literature. Chapter 6 describes the application of the TLEM in a clinical study. It is
hypothesized that deformations of the femur neck in spina bifida patients are caused by
more vertically orientated hip forces as a result of paralysis of hip abductors. The goal of this
study is to investigate if the force patterns on the hip in spina bifida patients, determined
with the model, are in agreement with this hypothesis. Finally, this thesis is concluded in the
general discussion in chapter 7. The added value and limitations of the TLEM are discussed
and future work is suggested for further improvements.
Introduction                                                                               23




1.5       References

Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 1999. A Dynamic Optimization Solution for Vertical
          Jumping in Three Dimensions. Computer Methods Biomechanics and Biomedical
          Engineering, 2, 201-231.
Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 2001. Static and dynamic optimization solutions for gait are
          practically equivalent. Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 153-61.
Arnold, A. S., Asakawa, D. J.,Delp, S. L., 2000. Do the hamstrings and adductors
          contribute to excessive internal rotation of the hip in persons with cerebral palsy?
          Gait and Posture, 11, 181-90.
Arnold, A. S., Blemker, S. S.,Delp, S. L., 2001. Evaluation of a deformable musculoskeletal
          model for estimating muscle-tendon lengths during crouch gait. Annals of
          Biomedical Engineering, 29, 263-74.
Bischoff, E., 1863. Einige Gewichts- und Trocken-Bestimmungen der Organe des
          menslichen Korpers. Z. rationelle Med., 20, 77–118.
Blemker, S. S.,Delp, S. L., 2005. Three-dimensional representation of complex muscle
          architectures and geometries. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 33, 661-73.
Brand, R. A.,Crowinshield, R. D., 1982. A model of lower extremity muscular anatomy.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 104, 153-161.
Carroll, N. C.,Sharrard, W. J., 1972. Long-term follow-up of posterior iliopsoas
          transplantation for paralytic dislocation of the hip. Journal of Bone and Joint
          Surgery, 54, 551-60.
Chandler, R. F., Clauser, C. E., Mcconville, J. T., Reynolds, H. M.,Young, J. W., 1975.
          Investigation of inertial properties of the human body. Report DOT HS-801430,
          National Technical Information Service, Springfield Virginia 22151, USA.
Crowninshield, R. D.,Brand, R. A., 1981. A physiologically based criterion of muscle force
          prediction in locomotion. Journal of Biomechanics, 14, 793-801.
De Zee, M., Hansen, L., Wong, C., Rasmussen, J.,Simonsen, E. B., 2007. A generic detailed
          rigid-body lumbar spine model. Journal of Biomechanics, 40, 1219-27.
Delp, S. L.,Loan, J. P., 1995. A graphics-based software system to develop and analyze
          models of musculoskeletal structures. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 25,
          21-34.
Delp, S. L., Loan, J. P., Hoy, M. G., Zajac, F. E., Topp, E. L.,Rosen, J. M., 1990. An
          interactive graphics-based model of the lower extremity to study orthopaedic
          surgical procedures. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 37, 757-67.
Duffy, C. M., Hill, A. E., Cosgrove, A. P., Corry, I. S., Mollan, R. A.,Graham, H. K., 1996.
          Three-dimensional gait analysis in spina bifida. Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics,
          16, 786-91.
Erdemir, A., Mclean, S., Herzog, W.,Van Den Bogert, A. J., 2007. Model-based estimation
          of muscle forces exerted during movements. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol,
          Avon), 22, 131-54.
Fick, A. E.,Weber, E., 1877. Anatomisch-mechanische Studie ueber die Schultermuskeln I.
          Verhandl. Würz. Phys. Med. Ges., 11, 123-153.
Fraser, R. K., Hoffman, E. B., Sparks, L. T.,Buccimazza, S. S., 1992. The unstable hip and
          mid-lumbar myelomeningocele. J Bone Joint Surg Br, 74, 143-6.
Friederich, J. A.,Brand, R. A., 1990. Muscle fiber architecture in the human lower limb.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 23, 91-5.
24                                                                                   Chapter 1



Glitsch, U.,Baumann, W., 1997. The three-dimensional determination of internal loads in
          the lower extremity. Journal of Biomechanics, 30, 1123-31.
Hatze, H. (1981) Myocybernetic control models of skeletal muscle. Pretoria, University of
          South Africa.
Heller, M. O., Bergmann, G., Deuretzbacher, G., Durselen, L., Pohl, M., Claes, L., Haas,
          N. P.,Duda, G. N., 2001. Musculo-skeletal loading conditions at the hip during
          walking and stair climbing. Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 883-93.
Higginson, J. S., Zajac, F. E., Neptune, R. R., Kautz, S. A., Burgar, C. G.,Delp, S. L., 2006.
          Effect of equinus foot placement and intrinsic muscle response on knee extension
          during stance. Gait and Posture, 23, 32-6.
Hill, A. V., 1938. The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle. proc. R Soc
          Lond B, 126, 136-195.
Holzbaur, K. R., Murray, W. M., Gold, G. E.,Delp, S. L., 2007. Upper limb muscle
          volumes in adult subjects. Journal of Biomechanics, 40, 742-9.
Huxley, A. F., 1957. Muscle contraction and theories of contraction. Prog Biophys
          Biochem, 7, 225-318.
Knutsson, E.,Richards, C., 1979. Different types of disturbed motor control in gait of
          hemiparetic patients. Brain, 102, 405-30.
Koopman, B. (1989) The three-dimensional analysis and prediction of human walking.
          PhD Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede.
Koopman, B., Grootenboer, H. J.,De Jongh, H. J., 1995. An inverse dynamics model for
          the analysis, reconstruction and prediction of bipedal walking. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 28, 1369-76.
Lieber, R. L.,Friden, J., 2001. Clinical significance of skeletal muscle architecture. Clinical
          Orthopaedics and Related Research, 140-51.
Meijer, K. (1998) Muscle Mechanics - The effect of stretch and shortening on skeletal
          muscle force., PhD Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede.
Neptune, R. R., Zajac, F. E.,Kautz, S. A., 2004. Muscle force redistributes segmental power
          for body progression during walking. Gait and Posture, 19, 194-205.
Oomens, C. W., Maenhout, M., Van Oijen, C. H., Drost, M. R.,Baaijens, F. P., 2003. Finite
          element modelling of contracting skeletal muscle. Philosophical Transactions of
          the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 358, 1453-60.
Pandy, M. G., 2001. Computer modeling and simulation of human movement. Annual
          Review of Biomedical Engineering, 3, 245-73.
Pandy, M. G.,Berme, N., 1988. Synthesis of human walking: a planar model for single
          support. Journal of Biomechanics, 21, 1053-60.
Pierrynowski, M. R., 1995. Analytic representation of muscle line of action and geometry,
          in: Allard, P., Stokes, I. A. F. & Blanchi, J. P. (Eds.) Three-Dimensional Analysis
          of Human Movement. Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL, pp. 214-256.
Praagman, M., Chadwick, E. K., Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veeger, H. E., 2006. The
          relationship between two different mechanical cost functions and muscle oxygen
          consumption. Journal of Biomechanics, 39, 758-65.
Root, L., Miller, S. R.,Kirz, P., 1987. Posterior tibial-tendon transfer in patients with
          cerebral palsy. J Bone Joint Surg Am, 69, 1133-9.
Sharrard, W. J., 1964. Posterior Iliopsoas Transplantation In The Treatment Of Paralytic
          Dislocation Of The Hip. J Bone Joint Surg Br, 46, 426-44.
Theile, F. W., 1884. Gewichtsbestimmungen zur Entwickelung des Muskelsystems und
          Skelettes beim Menschen. Ksl. Leop.-Carol.-Deutchen Akad. d. Naturforscher,
          46, 139–471.
Introduction                                                                              25



Thelen, D. G., Anderson, F. C.,Delp, S. L., 2003a. Generating dynamic simulations of
          movement using computed muscle control. Journal of Biomechanics, 36, 321-8.
Thelen, D. G., Anderson, F. C.,Delp, S. L., 2003b. Generating dynamic simulations of
          movement using computed muscle control. Journal of Biomechanics, 36, 321-8.
Thunnissen, J. (1993) Muscle force prediction during human gait. PhD Thesis, University
          of Twente, Enschede.
Tsirakos, D., Baltzopoulos, V.,Bartlett, R., 1997. Inverse optimization: functional and
          physiological considerations related to the force-sharing problem. Critical Reviews
          in Biomedical Engineering, 25, 371-407.
Van Der Belt, D. (1997) Simulation of walking using Optimal Control. PhD Thesis,
          University of Twente, Enschede.
Van Der Helm, F. C., 1994. A finite element musculoskeletal model of the shoulder
          mechanism. Journal of Biomechanics, 27, 551-69.
Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veenbaas, R., 1991. Modelling the mechanical effect of muscles with
          large attachment sites: application to the shoulder mechanism. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 24, 1151-63.
Van Der Kooij, H., Jacobs, R., Koopman, B.,Grootenboer, H., 1999. A multisensory
          integration model of human stance control. Biological Cybernetics, 80, 299-308.
Van Der Linden, B. (1998) Mechanical modeling of skeletal muscle functioning. Simulation
          of walking using Optimal Control.
Verdaasdonk, B. W., Koopman, H. F.,Helm, F. C., 2005. Energy efficient and robust
          rhythmic limb movement by central pattern generators. Neural Netw.
Weber, E., 1851. Über die langenverhaltnisse der fleischfasern der muskeln im algemeinen.
          Berichte u. d. Verh. d. Konigl. Sachs. Ges. d. Wiss. Math.-Phys. CL., 5-86.
Wickiewicz, T. L., Roy, R. R., Powell, P. L.,Edgerton, V. R., 1983. Muscle architecture of
          the human lower limb. Clinical Orthopaedics, 275-83.
Woittiez, R. D., Huijing, P. A., Boom, H. B.,Rozendal, R. H., 1984. A three-dimensional
          muscle model: a quantified relation between form and function of skeletal
          muscles. Journal of Morphology, 182, 95-113.
Yamaguchi, G. T., Sawa, A. G. U., Moran, D. W., Fessler, M. J.,Winters, J. M., 1990. A
          survey of human musculotendon actuator parameters, in: Winter, J. M. & Woo, S.
          L. Y. (Eds.) Multiple Muscle Systems: Biomechanics and Movement Organisation.
          Springer, Berlin, pp. 717-773.
Yucesoy, C. (2003) Intra-,inter- and extramuscular myofascial force transmission. PhD
          Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede.
Yucesoy, C. A., Koopman, B. H., Huijing, P. A.,Grootenboer, H. J., 2002. Three-
          dimensional finite element modeling of skeletal muscle using a two-domain
          approach: linked fiber-matrix mesh model. Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 1253-62.
Zajac, F. E., 1989. Muscle and tendon: properties, models, scaling, and application to
          biomechanics and motor control. Critical Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 17,
          359-411.
                                                              Chapter 2




Morphological muscle and joint parameters for

musculoskeletal modelling of the lower extremity


M.D. Klein Horsman, H.F.J.M. Koopman, F.C.T. van der Helm, L. Poliacu Prosé,
H.E.J. Veeger
Clinical Biomechanics 22: 239-247, 2007
Abstract

To assist in the treatment of gait disorders, an inverse and forward 3D musculoskeletal
model of the lower extremity will be useful that allows to evaluate if-then scenarios.
Currently available anatomical datasets do not comprise sufficiently accurate and complete
information to construct such a model. The aim of this paper is to present a complete and
consistent anatomical dataset, containing the orientations of joints (hip, knee, ankle and
subtalar joints), muscle parameters (optimum length, physiological cross sectional area),
and geometrical parameters (attachment sites, ‘via’ points).
One lower extremity, taken from a male embalmed specimen, was studied. Position and
geometry were measured with a 3D-digitizer. Optotrak was used for measurement of
rotation axes of joints. Sarcomere length was measured by laser diffraction.
A total of 38 muscles were measured. Each muscle was divided in different muscle lines of
action based on muscle morphology. 14 Ligaments of the hip, knee and ankle were
included.
The presented anatomical dataset embraces all necessary data for state of the art
musculoskeletal modelling of the lower extremity. Implementation of these data into an
(existing) model is likely to significantly improve the estimation of muscle forces and will
thus make the use of the model as a clinical tool more feasible.
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                       29




2.1      Introduction

Several musculoskeletal models have been developed to study for example gait, jumping or
cycling (Zajac, 1989, Pandy, 2001). Most models reviewed by Pandy (2001) and Zajac
(1989) are simple 2D models that can be used to gain insight in the principles of control of
movement and the role of its components. To study the function of specific muscles for
certain tasks more large scale musculoskeletal models are being used, for example to assist
in the treatment of gait disorders by studying orthopedic surgical procedures (Delp et al.,
1990, Arnold et al., 2001). Arnold et al. (2001) estimated muscle tendon length of the
hamstrings and psoas muscles of subjects with cerebral palsy, which is an important
parameter in order to predict the biomechanical effect of a surgical intervention. Delp et al.
(1990) studied the effect of a tendon transfer and lengthening by adjusting model
parameters according to surgical techniques.
For studies focusing on the evaluation of specific, clinically relevant, questions, an accurate
description of the geometry of the muscles and joints involved is important. The geometry
of the musculoskeletal system defines the moment arms and the length of the muscles and
thus the moment a muscle can generate at a joint given a muscle force. With this length of
the musculotendon complex and geometric muscle parameters such as optimal fiber length,
physiological cross sectional area (PCSA), the maximal muscle force can be estimated and
used as a constraint in an optimisation to determine the actual muscle force for a specific
movement or task.
To date, several anatomical studies have been published containing information on the
modelling parameters for the lower extremity, containing for example muscle attachments
sites (Pierrynowski, 1995, Brand and Crowinshield, 1982) or muscle parameters
(Wickiewicz et al., 1983, Spoor et al., 1991, Weber, 1851, Friederich and Brand, 1990).
Unfortunately, none of these sets are complete, which implies that when constructing a
complete musculoskeletal model different datasets have to be combined or missing
parameters have to be estimated.
The study presented here is part of a larger project that aims to develop a model that allows
clinicians to evaluate if-then scenarios with respect to treatment methods. For this, a
complete anatomical dataset will be necessary. Such a set should comprise data on joint
properties, muscle actuation parameters and geometrical information, all from the same
specimen.
30                                                                                Chapter 2




2.2      Methods & results

Measurements were performed on a right lower extremity of a male embalmed specimen
(age 77, height 1.74m, weight 105 kg). Pre-experimental selection of the cadaver took place
based on physical appearance. The specimen has a relatively high muscle mass and a high
fat percentage for the upper body.
The cadaver was divided at the level of L1, so the attachment site of the psoas major could
be measured. The specimen was fixed in a stainless steel frame, allowing easy positioning
(Figure 1). Four reference pins for measuring changes in orientation and position were
placed in each of the body segment. The foot was defined as a system with three segments:
hindfoot, midfoot and phalanges. These segments were constructed using k-wires. Due to
the position during fixation the ‘resting’ position of the leg was with the hip externally
rotated, the knee extended with the patella in the corresponding position and the foot in
plantar flexion and supination. Position was measured with a 3D-palpator (Pronk and van
der Helm, 1991), which is a 3D-digitiser used for this type of measurements with a
standard deviation of 1 mm per coordinate.
Although it falls outside the scope of this study, it is worth mentioning that prior to the
dissection of the specimen, magnetic resonance images (MRI) were acquired for future
evaluation of MRI-extracted parameters.




                      Figure 1 Experimental setup with specimen fixed in frame.
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                                       31



2.2.1      Inertial parameters

Before dissection, anthropometric measurements were performed for estimation of inertial
parameters (Clauser et al., 1969, Koopman, 1989). Segment mass and center of mass were
calculated using regression equations of respectively Clauser et al. (1969) and Koopman
(1989). Moments of inertia were calculated about the transversal and longitudinal axis of
the segment (Yeadon and Morlock, 1989). See table 1.

Table 1 Segment moments of inertia about the transversal (It) and longitudinal axis (Il) in kg m2, segment mass
(kg) and center of mass with respect to the global frame with the leg in original fixated position (cm).


Segment           It              Il             Mass            X              Y               Z

Pelvis            0.012           0.017          3.18            1.40           5.40            -8.92
Femur             0.197           0.058          11.54           3.70           -15.62          -0.44
Tibia             0.058           0.007          4.00            7.57           -57.00          1.75
Foot              0.005           0.001          1.30            10.48          -88.14          1.14




2.2.2      Palpable bony landmarks and reference pins

Prior to dissection 19 palpable bony landmarks were measured on the skin (see table 2)
with the leg in the original fixated , or ‘reference’ position, together with the tips of the
reference pins such that future local coordinate systems could be constructed. The choice
of landmarks was based on the definition of local coordinate frames as described by the
Standardization and Terminology Committee of the International Society of Biomechanics
(Wu et al., 2002).
To facilitate interpretation, all data presented in this study were subsequently expressed in
the coordinate frame of the pelvis (figure 2), with the hip center as origin and the axes
defined as follows: (Wu et al., 2002)

Z:         The line parallel to a line connecting the right and left anterior superior iliac spine
           (ASIS), and point to the right.
X:         The line parallel to a line lying in the plane defined by the two ASISs and the
           midpoint of the right and left posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS), orthogonal to
           the Z-axis, pointing anteriorly.
Y:         The line perpendicular to X and Z, pointing cranially.
32                                                                                                          Chapter 2



Table 2 Positions of bony landmarks with respect to the global frame with the leg in original fixated position (in cm).


Bony landmark                             X                          Y                           Z

PELVIS
Right anterior superior iliac spine       3.76                       8.78                        4.15
Left anterior superior iliac spine        3.76                       8.78                        -22.09
Right posterior superior iliac spine      -11.33                     8.58                        -4.53
Left posterior superior iliac spine       -11.14                     8.97                        -13.34
Right pubic tubercle                      6.10                       -0.02                       -7.33
Left pubic tubercle                       5.64                       -0.05                       -12.09
FEMUR
Trochanter major                          -5.98                      -3.66                       5.12
Medial femur epicondyle                   7.68                       -40.50                      -3.21
Lateral femur epicondyle                  3.17                       -39.96                      5.47
TIBIA
Medial tibia epicondyle                   7.78                       -44.05                      -2.06
Lateral tibia epicondyle                  3.28                       -43.60                      5.22
Tibial tuberosity                         8.74                       -45.77                      4.27
Fibular head                              1.26                       -45.65                      5.21
Medial malleolus                          11.20                      -79.21                      1.04
Lateral malleolus                         4.50                       -81.59                      4.55
FOOT
Navicular                                 10.51                      -83.41                      6.16
Proximal 1st metatarsal                   14.71                      -87.38                      5.12
Proximal 5th metatarsal                   9.96                       -90.12                      4.72
Distal 1st metatarsal (med)               19.82                      -90.81                      1.29
Distal 5th metatarsal (lat)               10.42                      -95.04                      4.52
Big toe (mid)                             22.75                      -94.83                      6.83




                                                    mid PSISs
                                        PSIS                          PSIS


                                        Y
                        ASIS                                                             ASIS


                              Z


                                            X
Figure 2 Coordinate frame of the pelvis (XYZ) in which all data of this study were expressed as defined by Wu et
al. (2002).
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                               33




Since it was impossible to measure all anatomical structures without segmenting the leg,
coordinates of the anatomical structures were always collected together with the tips of the
reference pins in each session. These data were then rotated and translated to the
‘reference’ position, using the actual position of the reference pins and the position of these
pins in the original position (Veldpaus et al., 1988). The error, as described by Veldpaus et
al. (1988), is in the order of 1 mm per coordinate for each session.



2.2.3    Muscle and ligament attachment sites

To measure attachment sites, skin and subcutaneous fat were removed, even as the intra-
muscular connections, resulting in muscles that were only connected to the bone at origin
and insertion. The measuring procedure was as follows:

        Careful removing of origin and insertion from bone;
        Measurement of the attachment surface on the bone. In some cases a muscle was
         divided in different muscle parts based on differences in morphology;
        Measurement of geometry of underlying tissue in case of intervening a straight
         muscle line of action;
        Measurement of the position of the reference pins for expressing data in the
         ‘reference’ position.

In total 38 muscles were measured, divided in 57 muscle parts. Table 31 shows the
measured muscles. The shape of the attachment sites of the muscle (parts) could be
modelled as points, straight or curved lines or surfaces. To describe its mechanical effect
accurately, the muscle element was divided in a sufficient number of muscle elements (Van
der Helm and Veenbaas, 1991). (see table 3). The attachment site of the muscle (part)
approximated by a point, was calculated as the mean of the measured coordinates on the
bone. The error is defined as the mean distance of the measured coordinates to the
calculated coordinate of the muscle element attachment site. Errors were in the order of
0.5 cm for most muscles. Two exceptions were found with errors up to 2.14 cm for the
insertion of flexor and extensor digitorum longus, where 4 separate tendon slips attach to
the different phalanges.
In case of a straight or curved line shaped attachment site, a 3D polynomial, parameterized
for the x-,y- and z-coordinates was fitted to the measured coordinates. The resulting
attachment sites of the muscle elements were proportionally distributed along the



1   Only a part of the data is presented here.          The   complete   dataset   is   published   on
http://www.ctw.utwente.nl/staff/BW/M.D.KleinHorsman/.
34                                                                                  Chapter 2



polynomial. Based on Van der Helm & Veenbaas (1991), for a first order polynomial at
least 2 attachment sites and for a higher order polynomial at least 3 attachment sites were
defined. The error of the 3D polynomial fit, defined as the mean distance of the data
points to the polynomial, had a maximal value of 0.46 cm for the origin of the lateral part
of the soleus.
For a surface attachment site, the measured coordinates were defined as a plane (Van der
Helm et al., 1992), where the measured coordinates were projected on that plane. The
circumference of the projected coordinates could define an area, divided in 3 equal parts.
For each part, 2 elements were proportionally distributed over the area resulting in 6 points
describing the surface. For surface shaped attachment sites the error was defined as the
mean distance of the measured coordinates to the optimized plane. It had a maximal value
of 0.42 cm for the origin of the gluteus minimus.
The above process resulted in a total of 163 muscle elements for the 58 muscle parts as
described in Table 3 and the Web Supplementary Material (WSM) 1.
14 Ligaments of the hip, knee and ankle joint were measured (Table 4). Ligaments were
considered as a straight line between origin and insertion.



2.2.4    Bony contours and via points

In case of a curvature of the muscle line of action due to underlying structures, two
methods were used to describe this change in muscle force direction.
If a muscle line of action was intervened by the surface of an underlying bone and the
muscle was free to shift over this surface, the resulting curved line of action was defined
around this bony contour using a mathematical representation of this bone (Van der Helm
et al., 1992). In that case the surface was digitized and a geometric shape was fitted to the
measured data points using an optimization described by Van der Helm et al. (1992b). This
resulted in two relevant geometries (table 5). Cylinder 1, representing the femur condyle, is
meant to describe the curved line of action of the gastrocnemius around this structure. The
second cylinder describes the curve of the iliopsoas around the pubis of the pelvis.
For 19 other muscle (parts) a curvature of the line of action was observed but a free shift
of the muscle over the underlying structure was not possible, as in tibialis posterior, or in
sartorius. In these cases ‘via’ points were defined, dividing the involved muscle in series of
straight line segments (Delp et al., 1990). See WSM.
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                                     35



Table 3 Per muscle part: origin, insertion described as surface, line(order) or point, divided in a number of
elements and the muscle parameters: PCSA, optimal fiber length(Lopt), tendon length(Lten), mass and pennation
angle. A muscle line can be straight (S), curving around a bony contour (BC) or consist of via points (VP).

                                                       S, BC    PCSA       Lopt       Lten       Mass      Pen.
Muscle                  Origo      Ins.      # elem.
                                                       or VP    (cm2)      (cm)       (cm)       (g)       ang.(º)

Add. brev. (prox.)                                     S        3.8        9.5        0          38.3      0
Add. brev. (mid)        Surf.      Line(3)   6         S        3.5        10.4       0          38.3      0
Add. brev. (dist)                                      S        3.2        11.2       0          38.3      0
Add. long.              Line(3)    Line(3)   6         S        15.1       10.6       0          168.5     0
Add. magn. (dist.)      Point      Line(2)   3         S        26.5       10.8       4.2        302.0     0
Add. magn. (mid.)       Surf.      Line(3)   6         S        22.1       10.4       0          243.0     0
Add. magn. (prox.)      Line(1)    Line(1)   4         S        5.0        10.7       0          56.0      0
Bic. fem. CL            Point      Point     1         S        27.2       8.5        13.0       245.0     30
Bic. fem. CB            Line(3)    Point     3         S        11.8       9.1        3.1        114.0     0
Ext. dig. long.         Line(2)    Point     3         VP       5.4        6.0        30.1       34.1      8
Ext. hal. long.         Line(2)    Point     3         VP       6.1        6.0        17.8       38.3      14
Flex. dig. long.        Surf.      Point     3         VP       6.6        3.8        16.6       26.7      28
Flex. hal. long.        Surf.      Point     3         VP       31.1       2.6        23.4       83.7      30
Gastrocn. (lat.)        Point      Point     1         BC       24.0       5.7        23.4       144.0     25
Gastrocn. (med.)        Point      Point     1         BC       43.8       6.0        21.2       278.0     11
Gemellus (inf.)         Point      Point     1         S        4.1        3.4        0          15.0      0
Gemellus (sup.)         Point      Point     1         S        4.1        3.4        0          15.0      0
Glut. max. (sup.)       Surf.      Surf.     6         S        49.7       12.0       0          629.0     0
Glut. max. (inf.)       Surf.      Line(2)   6         S        22.5       15.1       0          360.0     0
Glut. med. (ant.)       Surf.      Surf.     6         S        37.9       3.8        0          152.5     0
Glut. med. (post.)      Surf.      Surf.     6         S        60.8       4.5        3.0        287.0     16
Glut. min. (lat.)                                      S        10.0       2.8        7.3        29.1      0
Glut. min. (mid.)       Surf.      Point     3         S        8.1        3.4        7.3        29.1      0
Glut. min. (med.)                                      S        7.4        3.7        7.3        29.1      0
Gracilis                Line(1)    Point     2         VP       4.9        18.1       14.0       92.9      0
Iliacus (lat.)          Surf.      Point     3         BC       6.6        10.3       11.3       71.5      26
Iliacus (mid.)          Surf.      Point     3         BC       13.0       5.2        11.3       71.5      0
Iliacus (med.)          Surf.      Point     3         BC       7.6        8.9        15.5       71.5      0
Obt. ext. (inf.)        Line(1)    Point     2         S        5.5        6.9        3.5        40.0      0
Obt. ext. (sup.)        Surf.      Point     3         VP       24.6       2.8        3.0        72.0      0
Obturator int.          Surf.      Point     3         VP       25.4       2.1        8.2        55.0      0
Pectineus               Line(1)    Line(1)   4         S        6.8        11.5       0          82.4      0
Peroneus brev.          Surf.      Point     3         VP       19.0       2.7        6.4        53.9      23
Peroneus long.          Surf.      Point     3         VP       23.9       3.4        15.9       86.0      16
Peroneus tert.          Line(2).   Point     3         VP       6.2        4.3        10.0       28.0      19
Piriformis              Point      Point     1         S        8.1        3.9        1.6        33.0      0
Plantaris               Point      Point     1         S        2.4        4.8        35.0       12.0      0
Popliteus               Point      Line(1)   2         VP       10.7       2.4        1.0        27.0      0
Psoas minor             Point      Point     1         S        1.1        5.9        15.2       7.0       0
Psoas major             Surf.      Point     3         BC       19.5       9.9        11.3       204.0     13
Quadratus fem.          Line(1)    Line(1)   4         S        14.6       3.4        0          52.0      0
Rectus fem.             Point      Line(1)   2         S        28.9       7.8        9.6        239.0     22
Sartorius (prox.)       Point      Point     1         VP       5.9        34.7       7.9        217.0     0
Sartorius (dist.)       Point      Point     1         VP       5.9        34.7       7.9        217.0     0
Semimembr.              Point      Point     1         S        17.1       8.1        15.7       146.0     25
Semitend.               Point      Point     1         VP       14.7       14.2       23.7       220.0     0
Soleus (med.)           Line(2)    Point     3         S        94.3       2.4        8.5        238.5     64
Soleus (lat.)           Line(2)    Point     3         S        85.9       2.6        8.5        238.5     59
Tensor fasc. l.         Line(1)    Point     2         S        8.8        9.5        0          88.0      0
Tibialis ant.           Surf.      Point     3         VP       26.6       4.6        23.5       129.0     10
Tibialis post. (med.)   Surf.      Point     3         VP       21.6       2.4        11.0       55.9      25
Tibialis post. (lat.)   Surf.      Point     3         VP       21.6       2.4        11.0       55.9      43
Vastus interm.          Surf.      Line(1)   6         S        38.1       7.7        12.6       309.0     12
Vastus lat. (inf.)                                     S        10.7       4.2        9.6        48.0      0
                        Surf.      Line(2)   6
Vastus lat. (sup.)                                     S        59.0       9.1        9.6        568.0     0
Vastus med. (inf.)                                     S        9.8        7.6        9.6        78.0      0
Vastus med. (mid.)      Surf.      Line(2)   6         S        23.2       7.6        9.6        186.0     0
Vastus med. (sup.)                                     S        26.9       8.3        9.6        236.0     0
36                                                                                                                Chapter 2




Table 4 Origin and insertion of ligaments in cm with respect to the global frame with the leg in original fixated
position.


Ligament                      Origin (cm)                                       Insertion (cm)

                              X                  Y               Z              X                Y          Z
Iliofemoral lig. ant.         2.0                3.1             1.1            -2.2             -3.7       1.2
Iliofemoral lig. lat.         1.2                3.3             2.0            -3.9             -1.4       4.0
Pubofemoral lig.              2.7                -0.6            -3.6           -4.0             -1.4       4.1
Ischiofemoral lig.            -2.9               -1.3            0.0            -4.1             -0.4       0.9
Patellar lig.                 10.2               -39.7           3.6            8.5              -45.5      3.8
Tibial collateral lig.        7.6                -39.6           -3.2           7.5              -48.4      0.1
Fibular collateral lig.       3.0                -40.3           5.0            1.2              -45.4      4.3
Anterior cruciate lig.        5.8                -41.2           -0.1           6.2              -41.8      0.9
Posterior cruciate lig.       4.4                -40.3           1.2            3.5              -43.3      0.2
Oblique popliteal lig.        3.3                -37.9           3.0            3.5              -44.0      -2.3
Posterior tibiotalar lig.     10.2               -80.1           0.4            8.2              -80.5      1.0
Tibiocalcaneal lig.           11.1               -79.8           1.0            9.6              -82.5      1.0
Tibionavicular lig.           11.7               -79.7           1.9            11.9             -83.6      3.5
Posterior talofibular lig.    6.8                -80.7           5.0            6.6              -81.0      2.0
Calacaneofibular lig.         5.9                -81.7           4.4            4.2              -83.5      1.3



Table 5 Bony contours. sx, sy, sz are coordinates (in cm) of an arbitrary point on the central axis with a direction
[dx dy dz], expressed with respect to the global frame with the leg in original fixated position. R is the radius (in
cm), e is the mean distance of the datapoints to the cylinder.


                 sx          sy             sz           dx             dy             dz            R       e(cm)

Cylinder 1       6.06        -40.22         -1.75        -0.37          0.04           0.93          2.46    0.05
Cylinder 2       -1.27       0.97           -1.75        0.21           -0.14          -0.79         3.99    0.10




2.2.5           Axis and center of rotation

After removal of all muscles but with the ligaments still intact, the orientation of rotation
axes and the position of the center of rotation of the hip, knee, ankle and subtalar joint
were measured on the basis of the kinematic behaviour of these joints. Endo/exo rotation,
flexion/extension, ab/adduction were manipulated by hand for each joint. The movement
was limited by bone contact or ligaments. During these motions, segment motions were
measured with Optotrak® (100 Hz, Nothern Digital Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). A
cluster of 4 Optotrak markers was rigidly connected on the pelvis, femur, tibia and foot.
For expression of these data in the ‘reference’ position, the positions of the reference pins
were measured with a pointer. Instantaneous helical axis of the joints were determined
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                        37



from the position data of the marker clusters (Woltring, 1990, Veeger et al., 1997). Rotation
centers and axes are described by respectively the pivot point and optimal direction vector
(Woltring, 1990). The error e of the estimation of the rotation center and axis was
calculated successively as (Veeger et al., 1997):

       1 N
ep =     ∑ norm( Popt − Pi )
       N i =1
                                                                                      (1a)

       1 N
ev =     ∑ arccos(Vopt ⋅ Vi ')
       N i =1
                                                                                      (1b)


See Table 5 for the direction of the rotation axes and the position of the rotation centers
with the corresponding error.
The movement of the patella could be approximated as a rotation of this segment with
respect to the femur. For the determination of the rotation center and axis, 3 Optotrak
markers were mounted on the patella in addition to the 4 markers on the femur. To
account for the effect of the quadriceps muscles, an isometric spring was attached to the
tendon of the quadriceps and the anterior superior iliac spine to keep the tendon under
tension during knee flexion. The mean position of the 3 markers during knee flexion could
be described with a circular shaped polynomial. These data points were fitted onto a plane
and a circle was fitted on the resulting coordinates. The normal vector of the plane was
then defined as the rotation axis and the center of the circle as the rotation center (Table 6).
As can be seen these values differ from the knee axis and rotation center. The mean
distance of the measured data points to the estimated plane was 0.09 cm. The mean
distance to the circle was 0.02 cm.
After the separation of segments, a raster of evenly distributed points was measured on the
surface of the femoral head and a sphere was fitted to the points on the articular surface.
The position of the center of this sphere can be used as a second estimation of the rotation
center of the hip joint. The mean distance e of a data point to the calculated sphere is
defined as a measure for the accuracy of the optimization (Table 6).
38                                                                                                       Chapter 2



Table 6 Estimated rotation centers (in cm) and rotation axes expressed in the global frame with the leg in original
fixated position. Hip rotation center is based on a spherical fit through the surface of the femoral head. Knee,
ankle and subtalar rotation axis and center with the corresponding error e (Equation 1) are based on instantaneous
helical axis calculations as described by Veeger et al. (1997). The femur-patella joint is based on a circular fit
through the trajectory of the patella with respect to the femur.


Rotation center          X                     Y                      Z                      e(cm)

Hip                      0                     0                      0                      0.02
Knee                     3.84                  -40.78                 1.38                   0.79
Femur-patella            3.51                  -38.51                 1.90                   0.02
Ankle                    9.33                  -81.36                 3.14                   0.37
Subtalar                 10.87                 -80.61                 3.36                   0.37

Rotation axis            X                     Y                      Z                      e(deg)

Knee                     -0.528                -0.107                 0.843                  4.73
Femur-patella            -0.465                0.024                  0.0885                 0.09 (cm)
Ankle                    -0.730                -0.206                 0.652                  6.36
Subtalar                 -0.780                -0.223                 -0.584                 8.63




2.2.6       Muscle parameters

The dissected muscles were weighed, after removing of the tendon, fat and excessive
connective tissue, using a scale with an accuracy of 0.1 g. Belly, tendon and muscle fiber
length were measured with the palpator, by calculating the distance between begin and end
point. The length of at least five representative fibers was measured depending on the size of
the muscle. Standard deviation (SD) in fiber length within a muscle was around 0.5 cm for
most muscle parts as can be found in the WSM. Exceptions were measured in the gluteus
maximus, extensor digitorum longus, add. magnus and gracilis muscle (SD up to 4.7 cm).
The pennation angle was determined using the palpator by calculating the angle of the
direction at least five muscle fibers with the estimated line of action of the muscle. The
vectors were defined by the difference between measured begin and end point. Pennation
angles were measured in 20 of the 58 measured muscle parts. Standard deviations within the
muscle parts were in the order of 4º. For the other muscle parts pennation angles were small
and considered zero.
Sarcomere length, needed for determining optimal fiber length, was measured with a He-Ne
laser (Young et al., 1990). By positioning a fiber in the 1 mm beam at a fixed distance from a
scale, the diffraction pattern, representing the sarcomere length, can be read directly. Fibers
were isolated using a microscope (magnitude 20x). The resolution was 0.05 µm depending on
the quality of the embalmed fiber. In general from a muscle 6 samples of 6 fibers were
measured depending on the size of the muscle. For the smaller muscles a minimum of 3
fibers were measured and for larger muscles like the m. vastus lateralis up to 10 fibers were
isolated for diffraction.
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                           39



The optimal fiber length of a muscle (part) was calculated as the mean of the actual muscle
fibers length for a muscle multiplied by the ratio of the optimal sarcomere length of 2.7 µm
(Walker and Schrodt, 1974) and the mean sarcomere lengths of the fibers of that muscle.
PCSA at optimal muscle length was defined as the muscle volume divided by the optimal
fiber length, where muscle volume is defined as muscle mass divided by its density (1.056
g/cm3 (Klein Breteler et al., 1999)). Largest PCSA (82.6 cm2) was determined for the soleus
muscle due to relatively small fiber length.
Tendon PCSA was determined by calculating the area of a circular, ellipsoid or rectangular
assumed cross section using the measured width and breadth of a tendon area (see WSM).



2.3      Discussion

This study generated a unique anatomical dataset comprising all necessary data for
musculoskeletal modelling of the lower extremity. It contains attachment sites of all the
muscles of the lower extremity and if necessary the muscle is split up in different muscle
elements to describe the mechanical effect more accurate. For each element the important
muscle parameters for the estimation of force generating properties are given such as optimal
fiber length. Also the joint parameters of the hip, knee, ankle and subtalar joint are included.
The expression of all geometrical parameters, in combination with the bony landmarks in the
same ‘reference’ frame allows for expression in other local coordinate frames.
The presented data form one consistent dataset, which is a major advantage. When different
datasets are used to construct a model, scaling between datasets is necessary to correct for
inter-individual anatomical variations. The effect of scaling however is uncertain and
inaccuracies and inconsistencies are inevitable. The combined datasets result in an anatomical
configuration that never existed. In that case (unknown) interactions between different
anatomical parameters could get lost. The complete dataset presented in this study is based
on one cadaver, which results in a consistent dataset.
Attachment sites were represented by a number of coordinates depending on size. For line
and surface attachments the error was small (< 0.46 cm). Attachment sites of relatively long
tendons to the bone were represented by a point. Some of these attachment sites had
relatively large errors, e.g. the insertion of the semimembranosus (e=0.81 cm). Because these
tendons cannot exert a moment to the bone (Van der Helm and Veenbaas, 1991), a point
attachment site was still seen as an acceptable representation, despite the relatively large error.
With the distance between its origin and insertion, the length of a ligament can be calculated
in ‘reference’ position. The utilization of these data is limited in models that take stresses in
ligaments into account. With the stress-strain relation of the ligament, the stress could be
estimated given a certain initial stress and change of length. The calculated ligament lengths
however contain small errors due to model assumptions that lead to very large errors in
stresses. Secondly, the initial stress in the ligaments in the ‘reference’ position is unknown.
40                                                                                      Chapter 2



Several groups reported fiber lengths in muscles of the lower extremity (Yamaguchi et al.,
1990). A few groups measured sarcomere length for a limited number (max. 27) of leg
muscles to calculate optimal fiber length (Spoor et al., 1991, Wickiewicz et al., 1983). In this
study we reported optimal fiber lengths for 58 muscle parts. The measured actual fiber length
show small standard deviations within a muscle part. If larger variations occurred as in the
iliacus, the muscle was split up in different parts. The optimal fiber length was based on
sarcomere length measurements using laser diffraction, a very accurate method for measuring
sarcomere lengths. Mean sarcomere lengths were found between 2 and 3.7 µm, which is a
range consistent with the sliding filament theory according to Walker and Schrodt (1974).
This makes it likely that filament length did not change as a result of the embalming process.
This assumption is strengthened by the results of a study in rats in which the length change of
muscle fibers in muscles fixed intact on the skeleton appeared to be negligible as a result of an
embalming process (Cutts, 1988). The isolation of a fiber from a muscle part did not change
the sarcomere length as observed in other studies (Klein Breteler et al., 1999). For a few
samples no diffraction pattern was observed. It is assumed that this was caused by broken
filaments due to embalming process or rigor mortis. These samples were considered as
artefacts and were further ignored.
PCSA, calculated in this study as muscle volume divided by optimal fiber length, is an
important parameter for the estimation of relative force distribution in musculoskeletal
models. To have a good estimation of the relative muscle force, PCSA should be determined
using one method and based on one cadaver. A comparison with other datasets based on
different calculation methods and specimens is difficult. The exact calculation procedure
however is less important than the use of a consistent dataset.
When pennation angles are compared to the datasets reviewed by Yamaguchi et al. (1990),
there are 2 muscles that show large differences. In the present study, pennation angles up to
64 degrees were found for the medial part the soleus in contrary to the study of Friederich
and Brand in which a pennation angle of 32 degrees was reported for the soleus muscle
(Friederich and Brand, 1990) in contrary to angles up to 64 degrees for the medial part the
soleus which found in the present study. Wickiewicz et al. (1983) however reported areas in
the soleus muscle up to 60 degrees, which is comparable to our results. Yamaguchi only
reports one pennation angle for the tibialis posterior, in this study a lateral part is defined as
an extra element with larger angles (43 degrees).
The accuracy of rotation centers and axes is crucial in terms of kinematics and kinetics. The
hip joint is characterized as a ball-and socket joint and its rotation center can be estimated
using a kinematic or geometric approach. Kinematic joint center and axes were constructed
from motion data. A reconstruction of the hip joint rotation center by calculation of the
optimal pivot point is shown in Figure 3. The mean distance of each helical axis to the pivot
point is 0.85 cm. A comparison with the geometric rotation center could not be made due to
a missing reference point. However, as for the glenohumeral joint, it is very likely that both
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                                               41




                              40

                                                                                   Endo/exorotation
                              30
                                                                                   Ab/adduction
                              20                                                   Flexion/extension


                              10
                    Y (cm)




                               0


                             −10


                             −20


                             −30

                                                                         Optimal pivot point
                             −40

                                   −40   −30   −20   −10      0     10   20      30     40
                                                           Z (cm)


Figure 3 Frontal view of hip rotation center, defined as the optimal pivot point, calculated with instantaneous helical
axes of recorded hip rotations around three anatomical axes.



methods come up with comparable results (Veeger, 2000). When the geometric rotation
center is compared with an estimated hip joint center based on regression equations using
bony landmarks (Leardini et al., 1999, Bell et al., 1990), the calculated difference of 1.60 cm is
within the range described by Leardini et al. (1999). We considered the knee, ankle and
subtalar joint in this study as a hinge with a fixed position and orientation. In reality these
joint axes will alter during the arc of motion (e.g. (Lundberg et al., 1989) for the ankle joint) as
can be seen in the error for the determination of the rotation axes. The error for the
estimation of the rotation center of the knee was larger than the error for the ankle and
subtalar axis. This was mainly caused by the translation of the knee rotation center due to
rotation of the condyle of the femur over the tibia plateau. This movement of the femur
condyle with respect to the tibia plateau is constrained by ligaments and menisci. This
explained the difference in the axis of the cylinder fitted on the femur condyle and the
optimal knee axis during a knee flexion (table 5 and 6). With a plane and circle fit, a rotation
axis and center of the patella with respect to the femur can be estimated with a high accuracy.
The calculation of instantaneous helical axes did not lead to accurate results because rotations
round the longitudinal axis of the patella occurred. These rotations were due to the lack of the
stabilizing effect of the surrounding muscles. By taking the mean position of the 3 markers,
this irrelevant effect was not taken into account and only the translation in the sagittal plane
was used. For musculoskeletal modelling the position of the attachment sites of the
quadriceps on the patella is an important factor for calculation of the moment arm of these
muscles during knee flexion. Rotations of the relatively small patella round its longitudinal
42                                                                                        Chapter 2



axis will have small effects on the position of the attachment site. We believe that the position
can be estimated sufficiently accurate with the used method.
The dataset in this study comprises the geometry of one, unique, individual. Scaling of data to
a particular patient or subject to adapt the model to the anatomy of that subject has an
uncertain effect. MRI can be used to collect subject specific parameters, but only to a limited
extent. Recognition of attachment sites on the bone and fiber orientation is still difficult in
MR images, which makes the calculation of muscle lines of action arbitrary, at least. In
addition, MRI data can at this point only produce geometry data, while important parameters
for muscle force estimation such as optimal fiber length will still be based on cadaver data.
The development of subject specific models comprising all the anatomic parameters of the
subject will be one of the future challenges in musculoskeletal modelling, but this might still be a
long way to go. In the meantime modelling data as presented in this study will be of great value.



2.4       References

Arnold, A. S., Blemker, S. S.,Delp, S. L., 2001. Evaluation of a deformable musculoskeletal
          model for estimating muscle-tendon lengths during crouch gait. Annals of
          Biomedical Engineering, 29, 263-74.
Bell, A. L., Pedersen, D. R.,Brand, R. A., 1990. A comparison of the accuracy of several hip
          center location prediction methods. Journal of Biomechanics, 23, 617-21.
Brand, R. A.,Crowinshield, R. D., 1982. A model of lower extremity muscular anatomy.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 104, 153-161.
Clauser, C. E., Mcconville, J. T.,Young, J. M., 1969. Weight, Volume and center of mass of
          segments of the human body. Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Ohio (AMRL-TR-
          69-70), 339-356.
Cutts, A., 1988. Shrinkage of muscle fibres during the fixation of cadaveric tissue. Journal of
          Anatomy, 160, 75-8.
Delp, S. L., Loan, J. P., Hoy, M. G., Zajac, F. E., Topp, E. L.,Rosen, J. M., 1990. An interactive
          graphics-based model of the lower extremity to study orthopaedic surgical
          procedures. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 37, 757-67.
Friederich, J. A.,Brand, R. A., 1990. Muscle fiber architecture in the human lower limb. Journal
          of Biomechanics, 23, 91-5.
Klein Breteler, M. D., Spoor, C. W.,Van Der Helm, F. C., 1999. Measuring muscle and joint
          geometry parameters of a shoulder for modeling purposes. Journal of Biomechanics,
          32, 1191-7.
Koopman, B. (1989) The three-dimensional analysis and prediction of human walking. PhD
          Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede.
Leardini, A., Cappozzo, A., Catani, F., Toksvig-Larsen, S., Petitto, A., Sforza, V., Cassanelli,
          G.,Giannini, S., 1999. Validation of a functional method for the estimation of hip
          joint centre location. Journal of Biomechanics, 32, 99-103.
Lundberg, A., Svensson, O. K., Nemeth, G.,Selvik, G., 1989. The axis of rotation of the ankle
          joint. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery. British Volume, 71, 94-9.
Pandy, M. G., 2001. Computer modeling and simulation of human movement. Annual Review
          of Biomedical Engineering, 3, 245-73.
Morphological parameters for musculoskeletal modeling                                          43



Pierrynowski, M. R., 1995. Analytic representation of muscle line of action and geometry, in:
          Allard, P., Stokes, I. A. F. & Blanchi, J. P. (Eds.) Three-Dimensional Analysis of
          Human Movement. Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL, pp. 214-256.
Pronk, G. M.,Van Der Helm, F. C., 1991. The palpator: an instrument for measuring the
          positions of bones in three dimensions. Journal of Medical Engineering and
          Technology, 15, 15-20.
Spoor, C. W., Van Leeuwen, J. L., Van Der Meulen, W. J.,Huson, A., 1991. Active force-length
          relationship of human lower-leg muscles estimated from morphological data: a
          comparison of geometric muscle models. European Journal of Morphology, 29, 137-
          60.
Van Der Helm, F. C., Veeger, H. E., Pronk, G. M., Van Der Woude, L. H.,Rozendal, R. H.,
          1992. Geometry parameters for musculoskeletal modelling of the shoulder system.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 25, 129-44.
Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veenbaas, R., 1991. Modelling the mechanical effect of muscles with
          large attachment sites: application to the shoulder mechanism. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 24, 1151-63.
Veeger, H. E., 2000. The position of the rotation center of the glenohumeral joint. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 33, 1711-5.
Veeger, H. E., Yu, B., An, K. N.,Rozendal, R. H., 1997. Parameters for modeling the upper
          extremity. Journal of Biomechanics, 30, 647-52.
Veldpaus, F. E., Woltring, H. J.,Dortmans, L. J., 1988. A least-squares algorithm for the
          equiform transformation from spatial marker co-ordinates. Journal of Biomechanics,
          21, 45-54.
Walker, S. M.,Schrodt, G. R., 1974. I segments lenghts and thin filament periods in skeletal
          muscle fibers of the rhesus monkey and the human. Anatomical Record, 178, 63-82.
Weber, E., 1851. Über die langenverhaltnisse der fleischfasern der muskeln im algemeinen.
          Berichte u. d. Verh. d. Konigl. Sachs. Ges. d. Wiss. Math.-Phys. CL., 5-86.
Wickiewicz, T. L., Roy, R. R., Powell, P. L.,Edgerton, V. R., 1983. Muscle architecture of the
          human lower limb. Clinical Orthopaedics, 275-83.
Woltring, H. J., 1990. Estimation of the trajectory of the instantaneous centre of rotation in
          planar biokinematics. Journal of Biomechanics, 23, 1273-4.
Wu, G., Siegler, S., Allard, P., Kirtley, C., Leardini, A., Rosenbaum, D., Whittle, M., D'lima, D.
          D., Cristofolini, L., Witte, H., Schmid, O.,Stokes, I., 2002. ISB recommendation on
          definitions of joint coordinate system of various joints for the reporting of human
          joint motion--part I: ankle, hip, and spine. International Society of Biomechanics.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 543-8.
Yamaguchi, G. T., Sawa, A. G. U., Moran, D. W., Fessler, M. J.,Winters, J. M., 1990. A survey
          of human musculotendon actuator parameters, in: Winter, J. M. & Woo, S. L. Y.
          (Eds.) Multiple Muscle Systems: Biomechanics and Movement Organisation.
          Springer, Berlin, pp. 717-773.
Yeadon, M. R.,Morlock, M., 1989. The appropriate use of regression equations for the
          estimation of segmental inertia parameters. Journal of Biomechanics, 22, 683-9.
Young, L. L., Papa, C. M., Lyon, C. E., George, S. M.,Miller, M. F., 1990. Comparison of
          microscopic and laser diffraction methods for measuring sarcomere lengths of
          contracted muscle fibers of chicken pectoralis major muscle. Poultry Science, 69,
          1800-2.
Zajac, F. E., 1989. Muscle and tendon: properties, models, scaling, and application to
          biomechanics and motor control. Critical Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 17,
          359-411.
                                                            Chapter 3




The Twente Lower Extremity Model: a comparison of

muscle moment arms with the literature


M.D. Klein Horsman, H.F.J.M. Koopman, H.E.J. Veeger and F.C.T. van der Helm
Submitted to IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 2007
Abstract

The predictions of a comprehensive musculoskeletal model are highly dependent on the
accuracy of the muscle moment arms. In a musculoskeletal model the moment arms
depend on the anatomical parameters as implemented in the model structure. In this paper
a newly developed model of the lower extremity is presented. The aim of this paper is to
evaluate the validity of muscle moment arms of the model by comparing with direct
measurements in the literature and with other musculoskeletal models.
In this two-legged model, 10 joints are crossed by 264 muscle elements. Moment arms of
all muscle elements were simulated as function of the corresponding joint angles.
In comparison to other studies, muscle moment arms, as a function of joint angles, are
more extensively represented in this model. The moment arms presented in this study
appeared consistent with the relatively wide range of data from the literature. In general
differences were smaller than 2 cm.
The relatively large range of moment arms per muscle found in the literature can be
attributed to inter-individual and methodological differences. This made a validation of the
model based on a comparison with the literature less straightforward. Since muscle
moment arms in this model fall well within the range found in the literature the geometry is
considered trustworthy. Their added value is that they are all based on accurate
measurements of musculoskeletal geometry collected on the same specimen which will be
combined with muscle parameters from that same source.
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                    47




3.1      Introduction

Several studies have been reported in which musculoskeletal models are used to gain
insight in clinical issues. For example Delp et al. (1990) simulated the effect of a tendon
transfer and lengthening on generated ankle joint torques. In a more recent study the effect
of equinus foot placement on knee extension during stance was investigated (Higginson et
al., 2006) using a forward model based on 15 muscles from the dataset of Delp et al.
(1990). The validity of a musculoskeletal model, the correctness of the predictions, and
thus also a successful application in clinical practice, depends on the accuracy of the model
parameters. Of these parameters, muscle moment arms are probably the most important
factor. Besides the direct effect on the magnitude of a moment as a result of muscle force,
the muscle moment arm length determines the relationship between the length of the
musculotendon complex and the joint angle, which is relevant for an accurate
implementation of force-length effects. Muscle moment arm has even a quadratic effect on
the joint stiffness as a result of muscle stiffness.
Several studies using different methods have reported muscle moment arms as a function
of joint angle. Methods described in the literature to determine moment arms can roughly
be divided into three groups. The first group is based on the tendon excursion method
where moment arm is defined as the derivative of tendon travel to joint angulation (An et
al., 1984). This method has been carried out in cadaveric specimens (Fick and Weber, 1877,
Spoor and van Leeuwen, 1992, Visser et al., 1990, Grieve et al., 1978, Mollier, 1899) and in
vivo (Fukunaga et al., 1996, Maganaris et al., 2000). A second group of methods is based on
‘via’ points obtained through stacked 2D images of the joint and muscles acquired with
imaging techniques such as X-ray, CT, MRI or ultrasonography (Spoor and van Leeuwen,
1992, Koolstra et al., 1990, Gregor et al., 1991, Maganaris, 2001). The muscle line of action
is defined as a line through the ‘via’ points defined in the middle of the muscle belly and
tendon in a 2D image. Originally, the muscle moment arm is determined by measuring the
smallest distance between the line connecting the via points to an assumed center and axis
of rotation (Jensen and Davy, 1975). Nowadays, the via points are assumed to move with
the one or the other underlying bone. Muscle lengthening and shortening occurs between
two adjacent via points belonging to the two opposite bones, determining the effective
moment arm (Delp et al., 1990). The third method is the so-called ‘origin-insertion’
method, where moment arms are calculated using the position of the muscle origin and
insertion and joint orientation and position on the body segment (Brand et al., 1982,
Pierrynowski, 1995). If a bone is intervening with the straight line, the wrapping of the
muscle line of action around the underlying bony contour can be calculated (Hogfors et al.,
1987, van der Helm, 1994). The effective moment arm is determined by the straight line
between the muscle attachment and the tangential point at the bony contour.
48                                                                                 Chapter 3



Typically, in studies based on the tendon excursion method, the moment arm is determined
as a function of only one degree of freedom (DOF). When more than one joint angle is
varied in a joint with more DOF, moment arms are undefined, which makes such data
unsuitable for 3D musculoskeletal modelling. Secondly, for the tendon excursion method
counts that the direction of the muscle force is unknown. Relevant model outputs such as
muscle force and resulting joint forces can therefore not be determined.
In the second method, the attribution of via points to the bone can sometimes be arbitrary.
This can have huge consequences for the effective moment arms when the orientation of
the bones changes. Especially for joints with multiple DOF the result can be erroneous
(e.g. in an axially rotated shoulder or hip joint). Therefore this method can only be
implemented successfully if a musculotendon path is fixed to the bone due to surrounding
tissues as tendon sheets and retinacula, which prevent a shift over the bone.
In contrast to the first two methods, with the origin-insertion method the moment arm
vector and the direction of muscle force can be calculated for all combinations of joint
angles, which make it a suitable method for 3D musculoskeletal modelling. The origin-
insertion method does not account for the thickness of the muscle, and can therefore
underestimate the moment arm. In addition, it is assumed that the muscle can shift freely
over the underlying bony contour, which is also not always the case.
Moment arms based on the frequently used public domain model reported by Delp et al.
(1990) are based on the origin-insertion method and the via point methods have been used
to define musculotendon paths based on an anatomical dataset containing muscle
attachment sites and joint parameters (Brand et al., 1982). Later, also the wrapping around
bony contours was introduced based on van der Helm (1994).
Yet, a drawback of the dataset of Brand et al. (1982) and other datasets (e.g. (Pierrynowski,
1995)) is that they are insufficiently accurate. The number of elements required to describe
the mechanical effect of the muscle depends on the size of the attachment site (Van der
Helm and Veenbaas, 1991). A large part of the muscles in these datasets are described by
one muscle line, although moment arms may vary significantly within a muscle. For some
muscles with broad attachment sites (e.g. gluteus maximus) maximal 3 muscle lines are
defined. However, Van der Helm and Veenbaas (1991) showed that when muscle origin
and insertion are large surfaces on the bone (such as for the gluteus maximus), typically a
minimum of 6 muscle elements is required to describe the mechanical effect of the muscle.
In addition, muscle lines of action that curve because of intervening bony structures are
defined as straight lines which results in an inaccurate representation of the muscle
moment arm. Delp et al. (1990) introduced via points and wrapping surfaces to adapt the
original muscle lines of action. However these adaptations are based on estimations instead
of direct anatomical measurement of musculotendon paths, which makes the accuracy
disputable. Many studies are based on the model parameters of Delp et al. (1990) and
therefore the results of these studies are highly dependent on the accuracy of the moment
arms in this model, e.g. (Arnold et al., 2001) (Higginson et al., 2006, Neptune et al., 2004,
Anderson and Pandy, 1999). Strangely enough, a complete evaluation of the validity of the
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                          49



corresponding muscle moment arms by comparing with other studies is absent in the
literature.
At this point in time, only one consistent dataset for one specimen has been published for
the lower extremity, consisting of joint properties, muscle actuation parameters and
geometrical information required for accurate representation of muscle line of action
(Klein Horsman et al., 2007). In the current study we present a comprehensive
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity based on this dataset. This presentation
includes the model structure and the design choices for implementation of the anatomical
data in the model. These are important aspects as they affect mechanical properties of the
model such as muscle moment arms. The calculated muscle moment arms are compared
thoroughly with direct measurements in the literature as a first, but important step in the
evaluation of the validity of the model. Besides, a comparison is made with the moment
arms based on the model of Delp et al. (1990).



3.2      Methods

3.2.1    Model structure

In this study we present the Twente Lower Extremity Model (TLEM). The structure of this
model comprises connected elements, each representing the relevant morphological
structures of the lower extremity: segments, joints and muscles, similar to the upper extremity
model as published in Van der Helm (1994). Parameters of each element, as described in
more detail in the following paragraphs, were fully based on one recently measured
anatomical dataset for the right leg. The measurement of these parameters and the
corresponding accuracy of the used methods are described in detail by Klein Horsman et al.
(2007). Parameters for the left lower extremity have been determined by mirroring the
measured data of the right lower extremity in the mid-sagittal plane, defined by the plane
perpendicular to the global z-axis through the midpoint of the right and left anterior iliac
spine of the pelvis.
Segment coordinate systems were determined as described by the Standardization and
Terminology Committee of the International Society of Biomechanics (Wu et al., 2002). The
foot and talus coordinate systems were calculated analogous to that for the calcaneus. The
segments with their attachment sites and joint parameters were rotated from the ‘measured
specimen position’ as measured on the specimen to the so-called ‘initial model position’. In the
measured specimen position, the hip was externally rotated, the knee extended and the ankle
in plantar flexion. In the initial model position the local pelvis coordinate system was aligned
with the global reference frame and all the joints were in a neutral position. Joint angles in this
study are presented with respect to the initial model position.
50                                                                                     Chapter 3



3.2.2    Body segments

The TLEM consists of 12 body segments: HAT (Head, Arms, Trunk), pelvis and right and
left femur, patella, tibia, talus and foot. The fibula was considered as one unit with the tibia.



3.2.3    Joints

The following 11 joints were used in the TLEM: L5S1 joint and the left and right hip, knee,
patella/femur joint, talocrural joint and subtalar joint. The hip joint and L5S1 joint were
modelled as a ball-and-socket joint, defined by a rotation center and three orthogonal
rotation axes. For the present study, the knee, talocrural joint and subtalar joint were
defined as a hinge, with a fixed rotation center and axis. If required, more complex joint
definitions are possible, for example by introducing axial rotation in the knee joint when
simulating stair climbing. In the model, the patella rotates with respect to the femur around
a rotation axis with a fixed rotation center as measured by Klein Horsman et al. (2007). The
patellar ligament was defined as non deformable element connected to the tibia and the
patella segment. Thus, without introducing an extra degree of freedom, using the knee
angle the orientation and position of the patella were determined.
The orientation and position of the center of mass of the pelvis with respect to a 3D global
frame together with the joint rotations of the hip, knee, talocrural and subtalar joint result
in a model with 21 degrees of freedom (DOF). If an interaction between the feet and the
ground is considered the number of the DOF decreases with maximal 12, depending on
the model describing this contact.



3.2.4    Muscles

The TLEM contains 264 muscle elements to describe the mechanical effect of 76 muscles
of both the lower extremities. A muscle element is described by two 3D locations,
representing the origin and insertion of the element on the corresponding segments. To
describe a curvature of a muscle, two approaches were used. On the one hand, when a
muscle curves around an intervening structure and a shift of the muscle over the
underlying structure was not possible, via points, as measured by Klein Horsman et al.
(2007), were defined dividing the involved muscle in series of straight line segments (Delp
et al., 1990). The most distal via point on the proximal segment, if present, was defined as
origin of the muscle element, a so-called pseudo origin. The same counts for a pseudo
insertion defined as the most proximal point on the distal segment. On the other hand,
when a muscle is wrapping around a bony contour without being restricted in movement
by surrounding structures such as retinaculum and tendon sheaths, the muscle was
represented by a curved muscle element (table 1). This variant of a muscle element allows
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                     51



curving around a predefined surface, such that the shortest path between origin and
insertion is achieved (Van der Helm et al., 1992). The surface, defined as geometric shape
(cylinder, sphere or ellipsoid) was fixed to a segment. An example is the gastrocnemius
muscle, modelled as curved muscle element, wrapping around the bony contour of the
epicondyle of the femur, which was defined as a cylinder. Muscle parameters (such as
muscle mass, pennation angle, Physiological Cross-Sectional Area (PCSA), tendon length
and optimal fiber length) were assigned to each muscle element. To describe the
mechanical effect of muscles accurately, some muscles were split up into multiple elements.
This was done for muscles with large attachment sites, or with differences in muscle
parameters for different muscle parts. Muscle elements were considered as independent
actuators. The interaction with the other muscle elements is considered negligible.


3.2.5      Muscle moment arm

The moment arms of the muscle elements of the TLEM were determined for the estimated
active range of motion of the joints (Boone and Azen, 1979). A moment arm is calculated
as the derivative of the elongation of the muscle element with respect to the corresponding
DOF (An et al., 1984). Another representation used in this study to describe the
mechanical effect of the muscle is the ‘potential moment vector’ (pmv), which is a cross
product of normalized muscle force vector f and moment arm vector r. Vector f is pointing
from the position of the muscle origin (Porigin) to the insertion (Pinsertion) and r from the
position of the muscle insertion (Pinsertion) to the joint center (Pjoint) (Veeger and Van der
Helm, 2006):

pmv = r × f                                                                         (1)
r = p insertion − p jo int                                                          (2)

f = ( p origin − p insertion ) / ( p origin − p insertion )                         (3)


The ‘pmv’ describes the direction of the moment vector caused by a muscle force. The
‘pmv’ multiplied with the magnitude of the muscle force results in the corresponding joint
moment. Moment arms of the model of Delp et al. (1990) were determined using the
SIMM software (Delp and Loan, 1995).
52                                                                                                         Chapter 3



Table 1 Muscle parts included in the model defined as curved muscle elements (CME) or straight muscle elements
(SME) with segment of origin (ori.) and insertion (ins.). If a pseudo attachment is defined this is indicated with ‘X’.



 Muscle (part)             CME/SME            Segment Ori.      Pseudo Ori.        Segment Ins.       Pseudo Ins.


 Add. brev. (prox.)        SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Add. brev. (mid)          SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Add. brev. (dist)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Add. long.                SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Add. magn. (dist.)        SME                Pelvis                               Tibia
 Add. magn. (mid.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Add. magn. (prox.)        SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Bic. fem. CL              SME                Pelvis                               Tibia
 Bic. fem. CB              SME                Femur                                Tibia
 Ext. dig. long.           SME                Tibia             X                  Foot
 Ext. hal. long.           SME                Tibia             X                  Foot
 Flex. dig. long.          SME                Tibia             X                  Foot
 Flex. hal. long.          SME                Tibia             X                  Foot
 Gastrocn. (lat.)          CME                Femur                                Foot
 Gastrocn. (med.)          CME                Femur                                Foot
 Gemellus (inf.)           SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Gemellus (sup.)           SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Glut. max. (sup.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Glut. max. (inf.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Glut. med. (lat.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Glut. med. (med.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Glut. min. (lat.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Glut. min. (mid.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Glut. min. (med.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Gracilis                  SME                Pelvis                               Tibia              X
 Iliacus (lat.)            CME                Pelvis            X                  Femur
 Iliacus (mid.)            CME                Pelvis            X                  Femur
 Iliacus (med.)            CME                Pelvis            X                  Femur
 Obt. ext. (inf.)          SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Obt. ext. (sup.)          SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Obturator int.            SME                Pelvis            X                  Femur
 Pectineus                 SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Peroneus brev.            SME                Tibia             X                  Foot               X
 Peroneus long.            SME                Tibia             X                  Foot               X
 Peroneus tert.            SME                Tibia             X                  Foot               X
 Piriformis                SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Plantaris                 SME                Femur                                Foot
 Popliteus                 SME                Femur                                Tibia              X
 Psoas minor               CME                Pelvis            X                  Femur
 Psoas major               CME                Pelvis            X                  Femur
 Quadratus fem.            SME                Pelvis                               Femur
 Rectus fem.               SME                Pelvis                               Patella
 Sartorius (prox.)         SME                Pelvis                               Femur              X
 Sartorius (dist.)         SME                Femur             X                  Tibia
 Semimembr.                SME                Pelvis                               Tibia
 Semitend.                 SME                Pelvis                               Tibia              X
 Soleus (med.)             SME                Tibia                                Foot
 Soleus (lat.)             SME                Tibia                                Foot
 Tensor fasc. l.           SME                Pelvis                               Tibia
 Tibialis ant.             SME                Tibia             X                  Foot               X
 Tibialis post. (med.)     SME                Tibia             X                  Foot               X
 Tibialis post. (lat.)     SME                Tibia             X                  Foot               X
 Vastus interm.            SME                Femur                                Patella
 Vastus lat. (inf.)        SME                Femur                                Patella
 Vastus lat. (sup.)        SME                Femur                                Patella
 Vastus med. (inf.)        SME                Femur                                Patella
 Vastus med. (mid.)        SME                Femur                                Patella
 Vastus med. (sup.)        SME                Femur                                Patella
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                   53




3.3        Results

For the most relevant muscles, the moment arm of a representative muscle element was
plotted as a function of the joint angle as a typical example (figure 1). If the moment arm
curves of the elements representing a muscle substantially differed in shape, extra elements
were plotted. For curves with comparable shape, but with an offset, only the middle
element was plotted. A typical example of a muscle where this can be observed is adductor
longus, which is represented by 6 muscle elements with a peak adduction moment arm that
ranged from 6.4 to 8.4 cm (figure 2). This figure also shows the moment arm based on
Brand et al. (1982), who represented this muscle with one element. This moment arm falls
within the range of the elements determined in this study (figure 2).
One should realise that the moment arms plotted in figure 1 are only a limited
representation of the extensive set of moment arms determined with the TLEM. Generally,
muscle moment arm is a function of more than 1 DOF (e.g. moment arm of the
semitendinosus which depends on one knee angle and three hip angles). Figure 1 only
shows moment arms for a selection of muscles with respect to one joint axis, with the
other joints in initial model position. All moment arm components for all muscle elements
as a function of a series of combinations of the DOF can be found in the Web Supplementary
Material.1



3.3.1      Moment arms per DOF

For a wide range of hip flexion angles, rectus femoris, sartorius and tensor fasciae latae
have the largest moment arms with respect to the hip flexion axis. The hamstring muscles
and the middle part of the adductor magnus have the largest hip extension moment arms.
From neutral position to maximal hip extension gluteus maximus moment arms are the
largest (3 to 4.5 cm). These muscle properties were also observed in the model of Delp.
Some of the peak moment arms of the muscles in the TLEM agree reasonably well with
Delp’s model, with differences smaller than 0.5 cm (e.g. tensor fasciae latae and rectus
femoris). However, for gluteus maximus and adductor magnus differences are in the order
of 3 cm, not only between the TLEM and the model of Delp but also between different
studies in the literature (table 2). The hip external rotation is dominated in moment arm by
the gluteus maximus and the posterior part of the gluteus medius. The anterior part
contributes to the internal rotation of the hip. Other muscles in figure 1 have a relatively
small moment arm for hip internal and/or external rotation. This is in agreement with



1
  Only a part of the data is presented here. The complete dataset is published on
http://www.ctw.utwente.nl/staff/BW/M.D.KleinHorsman/.
54                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chapter 3




                                                                                                            10                                                                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hip external ( ← ) / internal ( → ) rotation moment arm (cm)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11a
                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                      hip extension ( ← ) / flexion ( → ) moment arm (cm)




                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                   21                                                                                                                            2                                 1,2,3,4a,12,13,14,15,19,20,21,22,23,25
                                                                                                                6           2                                                                  20

                                                                                                                4                     1                         15                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                           14,19

                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -2
                                                                                                                0                                   12                                              11a
                                                                                                                                                                            10a                                                                                                                                       11b
                                                                                                                -2                                  11b                                                                                                                                                      -4
                                                                                                                                                                                  13                                                                                                                                                             10a
                                                                                                                                                            b                                                                                                                                                        10b
                                                                                                                -4                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -6
                                                                                                                                                                          3,4a,22,23
                                                                                                                -6

                                                                                                                -8                                                                                                                                                                                           -8
                                                                                                                 -40           -20             0       20         40       60        80               100    120                                                                                              -50    -40       -30     -20    -10        0      10      20      30      40       50
                                                                                                                                           hip extension ( ← ) / flexion ( → ) angle (deg)                                                                                                                                   hip external ( ← ) / internal ( → ) rotation angle (deg)



                                                                                            10                                            3,13                                                                                                                                                               8
 hip abduction ( ← ) / adduction ( → ) moment arm (cm)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   knee flexion ( ← ) / extension ( → ) moment arm (cm)
                                                                                                            8                                                                               1,2
                                                                                                                                          4a,22,23                                                                                                                                                           6                                  20,28,29,30
                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                                                            4                                                                                                                                                                                                4

                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                            0          10b,15            14,19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                        -2                  21                                                    10a
                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9                                          4ab
                                                                                                        -4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 21
                                                                                                        -6                                 11b,12b
                                                                                                                                                                                   11a                                                                                                            -4
                                                                                                        -8
                                                                                                                                            25                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22,23
                                                                             -10                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -6
                                                                               -50                                       -40           -30     -20     -10       0       10       20                 30     40                                                                                    -140                -120        -100       -80         -60        -40       -20            0
                                                                                                                                     hip abduction ( ← ) / adduction ( → ) angle (deg)                                                                                                                                       knee flexion ( ← ) / extension ( → ) angle (deg)



                                                                                                                4                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                         plantar flexion ( ← ) / dorsal flexion ( → ) moment arm (cm)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             subtalar inversion ( ← ) / eversion ( → ) moment arm (cm)




                                                                                                                                              6                                                                                                                                                                               5,18
                                                                                                                       26
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3             16,17
                                                                                                                                                                             27
                                                                                                                                             5,18
                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                              6
                                                                                                                                                        16,17
                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                -4                   8                                                 7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9,24
                                                                                                                -6
                                                                                                                                                 9,24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -1              8
                                                                                                                -8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 26                     7
                                                                                                            -10                                                                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                              -60              -50         -40        -30      -20        -10        0        10             20                                                                                               -40          -30          -20          -10           0           10            20
                                                                                                                                     plantar flexion ( ← ) / dorsal flexion ( → ) angle (deg)                                                                                                                               subtalar inversion ( ← ) / eversion ( → ) angle (deg)




Figure 1 Moment arms of a representative element for muscle part as a function of the generalised coordinates of
the model: 1) Add. brev. (mid.); 2) Add. long.; 3 Add. magn. (mid); 4 a) Bic. fem. CL; 4 b) Bic. fem. CB; 5) Ext.
dig. long.; 6) Ext. hal. long; 7) Flex. dig. long.; 8) Flex. hal. long.; 9) Gastrocn. (lat, med.); 10 a) Glut. max. (sup.);
10 b) Glut. max. (inf.); 11 a) Glut. med. (ant.); 11 b) Glut. med. (post.); 12) Glut. min. (mid.); 13) Gracilis; 14)
Iliacus (lat., mid., med.); 15) Pectineus; 16) Peroneus brev.; 17) Peroneus long.; 18) Peroneus tert.; 19) Psoas
major; 20) Rectus fem.; 21) Sartorius; 22) Semimembr.; 23) Semitend.; 24) Soleus (med.,lat.); 25) Tensor fasc. l.;
26)Tibialis ant.; 27) Tibial post.; (med., lat.); 28) Vastus interm.; 29) Vastus lat. (sup.); 30) Vastus med. (mid.).
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                                                                   55




                                                          8.5

                                                           8

              adduction moment arm adductor longus (cm)   7.5

                                                           7

                                                          6.5

                                                           6

                                                          5.5
                                                                                                               Delp et al. (1990)
                                                           5                                                   TLEM


                                                          4.5

                                                           4

                                                          3.5
                                                            -50   -40    -30     -20      -10        0      10        20      30    40
                                                                        hip abduction ( ← ) / adduction ( → ) angle (deg)


Figure 2 Adduction moment arm of the adductor longus represented by 6 elements in the TLEM and by 1
element in the dataset of Delp et al. (1990) which is based on Brand et al. (1982).



moment arms based on the model of Delp et al. (1990). The moment arm of the mid part
of the gluteus minimus differ 2 cm which makes this muscle part an external rotator instead
of an internal rotator as in Delp’s model.
For hip abduction the gluteus medius has the largest abduction moment arm for a wide
range of motion. These values compare well with previous experiments (Dostal et al., 1986)
of which the moment arm was measured in neutral position. Moment arms determined
with the model of Delp were 2 cm smaller. For extreme abduction angles tensor fasciae
latae moment arms are the largest and differ in the order of 0.5 cm with Delp’s model. For
adduction the same counts for adductor magnus and gracilis.
In general the knee moment arms determined in this study fall within the range of a
cadaver study based on MRI and tendon excursion (Spoor and van Leeuwen, 1992).
Exceptions are the semitendinosus, which moment arms are 2 cm smaller near maximal
knee flexion in our study, and rectus femoris. The maximal moment arm of the patellar
ligament of this model is in the order of 6.5 cm at 20º knee flexion, which is a relatively low
angle and high moment arm when compared to wide range reported in other studies (see
for review (Krevolin et al., 2004)).
Moment arms with respect to the ankle resemble a tendon excursion study of 10 specimens
(Klein et al., 1996). However, for the triceps surae counts that when the foot is in maximal
plantar flexion moment arms are 2 cm larger than the largest moment arm found by Klein
et al. (1996). In an in vivo MRI study of 6 male subjects the moment arm differed 8 mm
(SD 4 mm) (Maganaris, 2001). The peroneal muscles and the extensor digitorum longus
56                                                                                                 Chapter 3



have the largest moment arms for eversion of the foot and tibialis posterior for inversion
of the foot. The moment arms of this study fall within deviations of moment arms
reported by Klein et al. (1996)


Table 2 Moment arm in initial joint position (MAI), peak moment arm (MAP) and the corresponding joint angle
for different muscles according the TLEM, Delp et al. (1990), Nemeth et al. (1985) and Dostal et al. (1986).



Muscle            DOF               MAI (cm)          MAP (cm)          Joint ang. (º)    Reference

                                    3.2               5.2               53                TLEM
Rectus femoris    Hip flexion       4.3               5.4               40                Delp
                                    4.3                                                   Dostal
                                    -4.5              -4.7              17                TLEM
Gluteus                             -7.3              -7.4              20                Delp
                  Hip flexion
maximus                             -4.6                                                  Dostal
                                    -8                -8                0                 Nemeth
                                    -3.7              -7.1              52                TLEM
Adductor                            -1.6              -5.2              60                Delp
                  Hip flexion
magnus (mid.)                       -3.9              -6.2              45                Dostal
                                    -1.0              -6.2              80                Nemeth
                                    -4                -7.1              52                TLEM
                                    -5.6              -6.3              30                Delp
Biceps femoris    Hip flexion
                                    -5.6                                                  Dostal
                                    -6.3              -8                40                Nemeth
                                    -6.7              -7.1              -23               TLEM
Gluteus medius
                  Hip adduction     -4.7              -4.9              -15               Delp
(ant.)
                                    -6.7                                                  Dostal
                                    -7.7              -8.8              -28               TLEM
Gracilis          Hip adduction     -7.8              -8.4              -20               Delp
                                    -7.1                                                  Dostal




3.3.2      Moment arms: combination of DOF per joint

A typical example of how a rotation round one axis influences the moment arm with
respect to another axis for muscles that cross more DOF, is given for the anterior part of
the gluteus medius (figure 3). In this case, flexion of the hip has effect on the three
components of hip moment arm. Figure 3 shows that our results are in general in
agreement with moment arms based on Delp et al. (1990) and Dostal et al. (1986). When
observing in more detail, moment arms of the gluteus medius with respect to adduction
and internal rotation axes, determined in this study, are more comparable to the
experiments of Dostal et al. (1986) than to the moment arms in the model of Delp
obtained with SIMM. For the flexion component of the moment arm close to the neutral
joint position, Delp et al. (1990) and Dostal et al. (1986) correspond more closely and
differences with the current study are larger. Moment arms of the posterior part of the
gluteus medius in the TLEM have a higher resemblance with these moment arms.
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                                                                                 57



                                                                  8


                                                                  6



                   moment arm component for gluteus medius (cm)
                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                    flexor, internal
                                                                  2                                                                rotator, adductor


                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                  extensor, external
                                                                                                                                   rotator, abductor
                                                                  -2


                                                                  -4


                                                                  -6


                                                                  -8
                                                                   -40   -20      0        20         40        60        80     100      120
                                                                               hip extension ( ← ) / flexion ( → ) angle (deg)



Figure 3 Moment arm components of the anterior part of gluteus medius with respect to the hip flexion-extension
axis (black line), internal-external rotation axis (dark gray line) and adduction-abduction axis (light gray line) as a
function of hip flexion angle. The 3 moment arms components in the TLEM are represented by the solid lines.
The 3 dashed lines represents the moment of the gluteus medius according study of Dostal et al. (1986) and
moment arms according to the model of Delp et al. (1990) is plotted with a dotted line.



Another example is given in figure 4 for the adductor magnus. In maximal hip extension
this muscle is an internal rotator and with increasing hip flexion this muscle becomes an
external rotator. The variation in external/internal rotation component of the ‘pmv’ as a
result of rotation round the flexion axis is in the order of 10 cm.



3.3.3      Moment arms: combination of DOF over more joints

Variations in the moment arm of bi-articular muscles as a result of a joint rotation in the
adjacent joint were small. The length of the hip flexion moment arm of semitendinosus
with the knee in maximal flexion was 1 cm larger than with the knee in 40º flexion. This is
the maximal difference in moment arm found as a result of a joint rotation in an adjacent
joint. In general these differences were smaller than 5 mm.
58                                                                                                                                                      Chapter 3



                                                                       10




              hip extension ( ← ) / flexion ( → ) pmv component (cm)
                                                                                                  hip flexion angle = 93 deg.
                                                                        8
                                                                                                             hip flexion angle = 17 deg.
                                                                        6                                            hip flexion angle = −3 deg.

                                                                        4

                                                                        2                                                       hip flexion angle
                                                                                                                                = −22 deg.
                                                                        0

                                                                       −2

                                                                       −4

                                                                       −6

                                                                       −8

                                                                       −10
                                                                        −10             −5                     0                 5                 10
                                                                              hip external ( ← ) / internal ( → ) rotation pmv component (cm)



Figure 4 Projection of the potential moment vector of the adductor magnus in the transversal plane. Adductor
magnus was divided in 3 muscle parts in the model based on differences in muscle architecture: proximal part
described with 4 elements (triangle), middle part with 6 elements (cross) and a distal part with 3 elements (circle).
Besides adduction, the adductor magnus contributes to hip internal rotation and extension for extreme hip
extension angles and becomes an external rotator and flexor with increasing hip flexion.



3.4        Discussion

Accurate model moment arms are of major importance in acquiring meaningful model
outputs (Erdemir et al., 2006). Moment arms play a direct role in the estimation of muscle
force using a muscle load sharing criterion. The moment arm also influences the force-length
and force-velocity characteristics of a muscle since it determines the relation between joint
angle and the length of muscle (and between angular velocity and contraction velocity). A
musculoskeletal model must be able to calculate the correct moment arms in any position.
The purpose of this study was to compare calculated moment arms of the TLEM, a new
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity, with direct measurements and existing models
from the literature. Since each measurement method has its own assumptions there is,
unfortunately, no gold standard. However, a comparison of the model predictions with
different measurement methods is useful, since all methods should produce results within a
certain range. Moment arms acquired in earlier mentioned studies based on 2D imaging
techniques and tendon excursion methods can only be compared to a 3D musculoskeletal
model with limitations, since moment arms are not determined when more than one joint
angle is varied. Nevertheless, a comparison could still be made by prescribing a rotation in the
model around the concerned axis of the model to determine the moment arm in question.
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                      59



3.4.1    Inter-individual differences

Dissimilarity between muscle moment arms reported in this study and data from the
literature are attributed to differences in morphology and differences in methods used.
Anatomical variations in moment arm can be substantial. The reported range of peak
moment arm of the patella tendon, measured in a cadaver study using a finite screw axis
method, was 2 cm which is 50% of the lowest peak moment arm (Krevolin et al., 2004). In
general, comparable inter-individual variations were found by Klein et al. (1996), although at
some joint angles larger variations were reported (up to 5 cm for the triceps surae acting on
the subtalar joint and up to 4 cm for tibialis anterior with respect to the talocrural joint).



3.4.2    Methodological differences

Variations in moment arm can only be fully attributed to different methods if the methods
were applied to the same specimen. Spoor et al. (1992) compared moment arms obtained on
the same specimen with MRI and tendon excursion and showed that moment arms can differ
up to 1.1 cm as a result of the differences between methods. Since this study only comprises
one specimen and two different methods, even larger variations might be possible.
An advantage of the tendon excursion method is that the center of rotation and the
application point of the moment arm at the tendon do not need to be explicitly determined
(Spoor and van Leeuwen, 1992). Yet, unfortunately this method also has its limitations. The
multiple joint angles which define the amplitude of the moment arm make it impractical to do
these experiments for all muscles and combinations of degrees of freedom. Secondly, the
muscles of the specimen are stiffened due to the embalming process, which hinders a joint
rotation and subsequent measurement of the excursion of a tendon. All muscles fibers
should therefore be cut and cleared away to allow free movement. This was impracticable
in combination with the extensive cadaver measurements done by Klein Horsman et al.
(2007). Finally, for muscles with broad attachment sites with fibers attaching directly to the
bone (e.g. gluteus maximus), the accuracy of measurement of muscle excursion is disputable.
A major drawback of the via point method based on 2D imaging techniques such as MRI is
that the center of rotation is roughly estimated with a line between two bony landmarks, or a
joint surface contact point. This line may differ significantly from the kinematic joint axis.
Secondly, in case of broad muscle such as gluteus maximus the definition of a moment arm is
less trivial than for example a muscle with a distinct tendon such as the Achilles tendon. This
makes the calculated moment arm sensitive for artefacts and thus unreliable.
Nevertheless MRI studies can be useful in understanding principles that influence moment
arm (Maganaris et al., 1999). The moment arm of the triceps surae in plantar flexion in this
study and an MRI study (Maganaris, 2001) differed more than 2 cm when compared to mean
moment arm from the tendon excursion study of Klein et al. (1996). Maganaris (2001)
measured moment arm at a maximal contraction level so that the muscle approaches a
60                                                                                    Chapter 3



straight line as assumed in our model. However, in a tendon excursion experiment,
surrounding tissues pull the non-activated muscle towards the tibia when a muscle is in
plantar flexion, which reduces the moment arm in this region. This explains why our data
have a better resemblance with the results of Maganaris (2001).
A limitation in the representation of the muscle line of action in the origin-insertion method
is the neglecting the effect of contraction level on the moment arm due to the thickness of
the muscle, bulging of the muscle belly or stretch in the retinacula. Spoor et al. (1992)
discussed the effect of contraction of the semimembranosus on the gastrocnemius moment
arm and vice versa. In tibialis anterior for example the moment arm for talocrural flexion can
increase with 1.5 cm with maximal contraction (Maganaris et al., 1999). An anatomically
realistic implementation of these effects in a comprehensive musculoskeletal model was not
found in the literature.



3.4.3    Evaluation of the validity of the model

In general the moment arms of the TLEM fall within the range of moment arms determined
for other subjects (Klein et al., 1996), which is a minimum condition to declare the results
trustworthy. A comparison with moment arms based on a single dataset, as with the model of
Delp et al. (1990), is hampered since differences due to inter-individual variation are
unknown. It is assumed that differences smaller than 2 cm can be attributed to inter-
individual variation. Larger variations were attributed to differences in methodology.
Differences larger than 2 cm were not only observed between the TLEM and the literature,
but also between different studies in the literature. Muscle moment arm in initial joint
position in two studies (Dostal et al., 1986, Nemeth and Ohlsen, 1985) based on an origin-
insertion method but with a different method to define attachment sites, differed 3 cm (table
2). Besides inter-individual differences, a cause for such a variation is a methodological
difference in representing a muscle with a broad attachment site by a limited number of
muscle elements. The moment arm of the current study has a good resemblance with the data
from Dostal et al. (1986).
The current study is the first step in the evaluation of the validity of the TLEM. By including
the force generating properties that were measured on the same subject, several other
measures such as maximal joint torques could be determined and compared with literature or
experimental data to further improve the reliability of model outputs.



3.4.4    Strengths and limitations of the model

The presented model is based on an accurate and extensive anatomical dataset of the lower
extremity containing all the required data for the construction of a large scale musculoskeletal
model. Accurate measurement of joint parameters, muscle attachment sites and intervening
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                          61



structures resulted in an extensive representation of the mechanical effect of the muscles in the
model. Muscles are defined with a sufficient number of muscle elements (Van der Helm and
Veenbaas, 1991) that are able to curve around geometric shapes or through via points if
intervening structures such as bony contours or retinacula were present. For an accurate
representation of the force-length characteristics of a muscle a subdivision in elements with
different moment arms is important, since the length change of each element as a result of a
joint rotation is different. In comparison to Brand et al. (1982) and Delp et al. (1990) and many
other models based on this dataset, the mechanical effect of the muscles is more extensively
represented in the TLEM (e.g. figure 2). Besides parameters that define the muscle moment
arm, other relevant muscle architectural properties such as PCSA, optimal fiber length and
tendon length were assigned to the muscle elements, which are needed for muscle force
estimation. Where other comprehensive models such as Delp et al. (1990) merge different
datasets and estimate missing parameters to construct a model, this model is based on one
cadaver, which is a major advantage since co-variances between parameters such as moment
arm and fiber length are maintained.
Collecting all model parameters on a subject to develop a subject specific model is a challenge
in musculoskeletal modelling. The use of a generic (cq. this) model for patient-specific
evaluations of clinical applications has its limitations, since ideally subject specific model
parameters are used for this purpose. With MRI or other imaging technique subject specific
parameters can be collected, but only to a limited extent. The use of via points through a stack
of 2D images is only valid in the one measured position, but will cause errors when
extrapolated to other positions, e.g. during axial rotations via points will not adequately present
the muscle line of action anymore. Only the origin-insertion method will allow for calculations
of the moment arms in any position of the model. Important muscle parameters for muscle
force estimation such as optimal fiber length cannot be determined using imaging techniques.
Another drawback of MRI is the difficulty to recognise the attachment sites on the bone,
which makes a calculated muscle line of action questionable.
It is likely that scaling of the generic dataset will improve the resemblance with the subject’s
anatomy. Yet, scaling is only effective if a correlation between the anatomical parameters and
the scaling parameters has been shown. One MRI study was reported showing good
correlation between moment arms and external measures (Murray et al., 2002). Until now, no
such studies based on accurate measurements on multiple specimens have been published.
Scaling parameters are currently based on non-validated assumptions.
On the way towards the development of subject specific models the collection of more
consistent and comprehensive anatomical datasets on a large number of specimens would be
very relevant. This would require a major effort of many research groups all using the same
measurement protocol, in order to obtain a well-validated ‘industrial standard’. These data can
be used to develop accurate and extensive scaling regression equations based on externally
measurable subject dimensions which would improve the resemblance of the model with the
anatomy of the subject. This will be one of the future challenges in musculoskeletal modelling,
which has probably a long way to go. In the meantime this model will be of great value.
62                                                                                  Chapter 3




3.5      References

An, K. N., Takahashi, K., Harrigan, T. P.,Chao, E. Y., 1984. Determination of muscle
         orientations and moment arms. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 106, 280-
         2.
Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 1999. A Dynamic Optimization Solution for Vertical
         Jumping in Three Dimensions. Computer Methods Biomechanics and Biomedical
         Engineering, 2, 201-231.
Arnold, A. S., Blemker, S. S.,Delp, S. L., 2001. Evaluation of a deformable musculoskeletal
         model for estimating muscle-tendon lengths during crouch gait. Annals of
         Biomedical Engineering, 29, 263-74.
Boone, D. C.,Azen, S. P., 1979. Normal range of motion of joints in male subjects. Journal
         of Bone and Joint Surgery, 61, 756-9.
Brand, R. A., R.D., C., Wittstock, C. E., Pedersen, D. R., Clark, C. R.,Van Krieken, F. M.,
         1982. A model of the lower extremity muscular anatomy. Journal of
         Biomechanical Engineering, 104, 304-310.
Delp, S. L.,Loan, J. P., 1995. A graphics-based software system to develop and analyze
         models of musculoskeletal structures. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 25,
         21-34.
Delp, S. L., Loan, J. P., Hoy, M. G., Zajac, F. E., Topp, E. L.,Rosen, J. M., 1990. An
         interactive graphics-based model of the lower extremity to study orthopaedic
         surgical procedures. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 37, 757-67.
Dostal, W. F., Soderberg, G. L.,Andrews, J. G., 1986. Actions of hip muscles. Physical
         Therapy, 66, 351-61.
Erdemir, A., Mclean, S., Herzog, W.,Van Den Bogert, A. J., 2006. Model-based estimation
         of muscle forces exerted during movements. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol,
         Avon).
Fick, A. E.,Weber, E., 1877. Anatomisch-mechanische Studie ueber die Schultermuskeln I.
         Verhandl. Würz. Phys. Med. Ges., 11, 123-153.
Fukunaga, T., Ito, M., Ichinose, Y., Kuno, S., Kawakami, Y.,Fukashiro, S., 1996. Tendinous
         movement of a human muscle during voluntary contractions determined by real-
         time ultrasonography. Journal of Applied Physiology, 81, 1430-3.
Gregor, R. J., Komi, P. V., Browning, R. C.,Jarvinen, M., 1991. A comparison of the triceps
         surae and residual muscle moments at the ankle during cycling. Journal of
         Biomechanics, 24, 287-97.
Grieve, D. W., Pheasant, S.,Cavanagh, P. R. 1978 Prediction of gastrocnemius length from
         knee and ankle joint posture, Baltimore, MD, University Park Press.
Higginson, J. S., Zajac, F. E., Neptune, R. R., Kautz, S. A., Burgar, C. G.,Delp, S. L., 2006.
         Effect of equinus foot placement and intrinsic muscle response on knee extension
         during stance. Gait and Posture, 23, 32-6.
Hogfors, C., Sigholm, G.,Herberts, P., 1987. Biomechanical model of the human shoulder-
         -I. Elements. Journal of Biomechanics, 20, 157-66.
Jensen, R. H.,Davy, D. T., 1975. An investigation of muscle lines of action about the hip: a
         centroid line approach vs the straight line approach. Journal of Biomechanics, 8,
         103-10.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F., Van Der Helm, F. C., Prose, L. P.,Veeger, H. E.,
         2007. Morphological muscle and joint parameters for musculoskeletal modelling
         of the lower extremity. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol, Avon), 22, 239-47.
A comparison of muscle moment arms with the literature                                       63



Klein, P., Mattys, S.,Rooze, M., 1996. Moment arm length variations of selected muscles
           acting on talocrural and subtalar joints during movement: an in vitro study.
           Journal of Biomechanics, 29, 21-30.
Koolstra, J. H., Van Eijden, T. M., Van Spronsen, P. H., Weijs, W. A.,Valk, J., 1990.
           Computer-assisted estimation of lines of action of human masticatory muscles
           reconstructed in vivo by means of magnetic resonance imaging of parallel
           sections. Archives of Oral Biology, 35, 549-56.
Krevolin, J. L., Pandy, M. G.,Pearce, J. C., 2004. Moment arm of the patellar tendon in the
           human knee. Journal of Biomechanics, 37, 785-8.
Maganaris, C. N., 2001. Force-length characteristics of in vivo human skeletal muscle. Acta
           Physiologica Scandinavica, 172, 279-85.
Maganaris, C. N., Baltzopoulos, V.,Sargeant, A. J., 1999. Changes in the tibialis anterior
           tendon moment arm from rest to maximum isometric dorsiflexion: in vivo
           observations in man. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon), 14, 661-6.
Maganaris, C. N., Baltzopoulos, V.,Sargeant, A. J., 2000. In vivo measurement-based
           estimations of the human Achilles tendon moment arm. European Journal of
           Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 83, 363-9.
Mollier, S., 1899. Ueber die Statik und Mechanik des Menslichen Schultergurtels unter
           Normalen und Pathologischen Verhaltnissen. Festschr. f. C. v. Kupffer, Jena.
Murray, W. M., Buchanan, T. S.,Delp, S. L., 2002. Scaling of peak moment arms of elbow
           muscles with upper extremity bone dimensions. Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 19-
           26.
Nemeth, G.,Ohlsen, H., 1985. In vivo moment arm lengths for hip extensor muscles at
           different angles of hip flexion. Journal of Biomechanics, 18, 129-40.
Neptune, R. R., Zajac, F. E.,Kautz, S. A., 2004. Muscle force redistributes segmental power
           for body progression during walking. Gait and Posture, 19, 194-205.
Pierrynowski, M. R., 1995. Analytic representation of muscle line of action and geometry,
           in: Allard, P., Stokes, I. A. F. & Blanchi, J. P. (Eds.) Three-Dimensional Analysis
           of Human Movement. Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL, pp. 214-256.
Spoor, C. W.,Van Leeuwen, J. L., 1992. Knee muscle moment arms from MRI and from
           tendon travel. Journal of Biomechanics, 25, 201-6.
Van Der Helm, F. C., 1994. A finite element musculoskeletal model of the shoulder
           mechanism. Journal of Biomechanics, 27, 551-69.
Van Der Helm, F. C., Veeger, H. E., Pronk, G. M., Van Der Woude, L. H.,Rozendal, R.
           H., 1992. Geometry parameters for musculoskeletal modelling of the shoulder
           system. Journal of Biomechanics, 25, 129-44.
Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veenbaas, R., 1991. Modelling the mechanical effect of muscles with
           large attachment sites: application to the shoulder mechanism. Journal of
           Biomechanics, 24, 1151-63.
Veeger, H. E. J.,Van Der Helm, F. C., 2006. Shoulder Function: the perfect compromise
           between mobility and stability. Journal of Biomechanics [submitted].
Visser, J. J., Hoogkamer, J. E., Bobbert, M. F.,Huijing, P. A., 1990. Length and moment
           arm of human leg muscles as a function of knee and hip-joint angles. European
           Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 61, 453-60.
Wu, G., Siegler, S., Allard, P., Kirtley, C., Leardini, A., Rosenbaum, D., Whittle, M., D'lima,
           D. D., Cristofolini, L., Witte, H., Schmid, O.,Stokes, I., 2002. ISB
           recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate system of various joints for
           the reporting of human joint motion--part I: ankle, hip, and spine. International
           Society of Biomechanics. Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 543-8.
                                                            Chapter 4




The Twente Lower Extremity Model: a comparison of

maximal isometric moment with the literature


M.D. Klein Horsman, H.F.J.M. Koopman, H.E.J. Veeger and F.C.T. van der Helm
Submitted to Journal of Biomechanics, 2007
Abstract

Accuracy of comprehensive musculoskeletal models is highly dependent on consistency of
its parameters. Since a complete dataset is as yet not available, these models have been
constructed using different datasets. We developed a musculoskeletal model of the lower
extremity based on a recently collected, complete and consistent anatomical dataset. The
aim of this study is the evaluation of the validity of the model by comparing maximal
isometric joint moments simulated with the model with in vivo measured maximal
voluntary moments from the literature.
Maximal isometric moments are determined with respect to 6 joint axes of the model based
on full activation of all corresponding Hill-type muscle elements in the model.
Maximal isometric moments correspond with in vivo measured maximal voluntary
moments, except for knee extension and plantar flexion where a large difference was found
in angle at which peak moment occurred.
In other comprehensive musculoskeletal models different datasets are merged and missing
parameters estimated such that a good fit is obtained. This may be functional but will not
necessarily result in an accurate representation. The added value of the current model is
that all parameters are based on the same specimen so that different parameters are
consistent. Deviations found for knee extensors and plantar flexors showed limitations in
representation of these muscles using a Hill model. Adaptation of measured tendon length
led to a good fit with in vivo data.
A comparison of maximal isometric moments with the literature                              67




4.1      Introduction

Comprehensive musculoskeletal models are needed to get more insight how muscle force
and joint moment are affected by orthopedic interventions in the geometry of the
musculoskeletal system (Delp et al., 1990, Arnold et al., 2001). Simulating the kinematic
and dynamic behaviour of the musculoskeletal system will give insight in how muscle force
is produced and the resulting movement is controlled. The study presented here is part of a
larger project that aims to develop an inverse and forward 3D musculoskeletal model of
the lower extremity to assist in the treatment of gait disorders by the evaluation of if-then
scenarios.
The outcome of a musculoskeletal model is highly dependent on its geometry, specified by
anatomical parameters. Joint and muscle geometry define the moment arms and length of a
muscle. Combined with muscle parameters such as optimal fiber length and physiological
cross sectional area (PCSA), the maximal force and moment generated by a muscle can be
estimated. Various anatomical datasets of the lower extremity have been reported in the
literature, containing model parameters such as muscle attachment sites (Pierrynowski,
1995, Brand and Crowinshield, 1982) or muscle force generating properties like optimal
fiber length and PCSA (Wickiewicz et al., 1983, Spoor et al., 1991, Weber, 1851). However,
a dataset containing all the required model parameters obtained from one specimen was
not available. Therefore, when constructing a comprehensive musculoskeletal model
different datasets had to be merged and missing parameters estimated to obtain the
required complete dataset. By combining the anatomical properties from different
specimens the possible effect of inter-individual differences, or intra-individual ‘tuning’ is
not taken into account. We have developed a musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity
(Klein Horsman et al., 2007b) in which all model parameters were based on a recently
collected extensive anatomical dataset (Klein Horsman et al., 2007a).
The goal of this study is to evaluate the validity of this model by comparing maximal
isometric joint moments, simulated with the model, with in vivo measured maximal
voluntary moments from the literature.
68                                                                                Chapter 4




4.2      Methods

4.2.1    Twente Lower Extremity Model

The Twente lower extremity model (TLEM) is a recently developed comprehensive
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity in which an extensive set of connected
elements are defined, each representing a relevant morphological structure of the lower
extremity (Klein Horsman et al., 2007b). All the parameters assigned to the elements are
based on a recently measured anatomical dataset on a right lower extremity (Klein
Horsman et al., 2007a). The model has 21 degrees of freedom (DOF). The left and right
hip are modelled as a ball socket joint (each 3 DOF); the knee, ankle and subtalar joint are
defined as single hinge joints (each 1 DOF). The other DOF, which fall outside the scope
of this study, describe the position and orientation of the pelvis in 3D (6 DOF) and the
orientation of the trunk (3 DOF). By prescribing these generalised coordinates, kinematic
properties of the elements in the model, such as muscle elements, can be determined. The
model contains 264 muscle elements to describe the mechanical effect of 76 muscles of
both the lower extremities. A muscle element is defined by the position of origin and
insertion. In case of curvature due to intervening structures, ‘via’ points and geometric
shapes are used to describe the muscle line of action more accurately. Each muscle element
is considered to be an independent actuator with its own set of muscle parameters (muscle
mass, pennation angle, physiological cross-sectional area (PCSA), tendon length and
optimal fiber length). More details about the structure of the TLEM and the resulting
moment arms are described in a previous study (Klein Horsman et al., 2007b).



4.2.2    Maximal isometric moment

The maximal isometric muscle force was calculated for the active range of motion of the
joints (Boone and Azen, 1979) using the muscle parameters assigned to the muscle
element. A muscle was modelled as a standard Hill-type muscle element as shown in figure
1 (Winters and Stark, 1985). The length of a musculotendon complex Lmus was defined as
the length of the muscle element, calculated as the distance between the origin and
insertion on both body segments. For a curved muscle element, the length was defined as
the shortest distance between origin and insertion around the surface of a geometric shape.
In case of a via point, muscle length was defined as the length of the muscle element plus a
constant length between the real attachment and the pseudo attachment.
A comparison of maximal isometric moments with the literature                                                    69



                                                     Lmus




                                                   PE
                                                                   CE




                                                                                             d0
                                                                               e
                                                SE




                                                                            Lc
                                                                     α



                              Lt                  Lse


Figure 1 Hill model with contractile element (CE), series elastic element (SE) and parallel elastic element (PE). d0
is assumed to be constant, hence Lce and α can be calculated for a given Lmus, Lt and Lse.



The width d0 of the muscle due to pennation was assumed constant, based on the
assumption of a constant muscle volume during contraction (van Der Linden et al., 1998).
d0 was calculated with the initial pennation angle α0 and initial length of the contractile
element Lce0 (figure1):

d 0 = sin(α 0 ) * Lce 0
                                                                                                        (1)
The actual pennation angle α can be calculated using actual fiber length:

                      d0
α = arctan(                     )
                Lmus − Lt − Lse                                                                         (2)

The length of contractile element Lce was determined with the length of the tendon Lt and
the lengthening of the series-elastic element Lse, assumed to be zero in the first approach.

        Lmus − Lt − Lse
Lce =
            cos(α )                                                                                     (3)

The normalised force length relation was described with a Gaussian relation:

             ⎛ ⎛ L − L ⎞2 ⎞
 f (l ) = exp⎜ − ⎜⎜ ce ce 0
                            ⎟ ⎟
             ⎜ ⎝ Lcesh ⎟⎠ ⎟
             ⎝                ⎠                                                                         (4)
70                                                                                   Chapter 4



Lcesh, defined as 0.5*Lce0, is a shape parameter determining the width of the f-l curve. With
these parameters the maximal isometric force Fce in the contractile element was calculated
as a function of joint angle:

Fce = a ⋅ f (l ) ⋅ f (v) ⋅ cos(α ) ⋅ Fmax
                                                                                     (5)

In which Fmax is the maximal muscle force:

Fmax = PCSA * σ max                                                                  (6)

For the simulation of maximal isometric moment, muscle activation a and force-velocity
properties f(v), normally varying between 0 and 1, were set to 1. In this study we used a
maximal stress in a muscle fiber σmax of 27 N/cm2 which falls in the range of values
reported in the literature (Spector et al., 1980, Powell et al., 1984, Weijs and Hillen, 1985).
Passive forces in the parallel elastic element, representing resistance forces of passive
structures such as the epimysium and perimysium, were described as a function of the
Lmus:

                      lmus −lmuso
                                        PEsh
       F                            ⋅
Fpe = PEshmax (e l muso                 PExm
                                               − 1)
     e      −1                                                                       (7)

In which lmuso is the length of the muscle at optimum fiber length. Parameters PEsh and
PExm, describing the shape of the curve, were set to respectively 4 and 0.4 (Winters and
Stark, 1988). The total muscle force was defined as:

Fmus = Fce + Fpe
                                                                                     (8)

Finally the maximal isometric moment Mmus was computed by multiplying Fmus with the
moment arm d:

M mus = d × Fmus
                                                                                     (9)

The maximal isometric joint moment was determined by a summation of the contributing
muscle elements:

M max = ∑ M mus
           n                                                                         (10)
A comparison of maximal isometric moments with the literature                                 71



4.2.3    TLEM in comparison with in vivo data and Delp et al. (1990)

The maximal isometric joint moments of the hip, knee and ankle were determined with and
without the passive component as a function of the corresponding joint angle. Joint angle
is defined with respect to the initial model position in which the local pelvis coordinate
system is aligned with the global reference frame and all joints are in a neutral position as
described by Klein Horsman et al. (2006b). In order to evaluate the validity of the model a
comparison is made with in vivo measured maximal voluntary joint moments from the
literature. In the simulations all relevant joint angles were equalised with the angles in the in
vivo measurements. The following curve properties were compared: the shape, the angle of
peak moment and the amplitude. A specific tension of 27 N/cm2 was used to scale the
strength of the model with in vivo data. Secondly, a comparison is made with maximal
isometric joint moments based on the frequently used public domain biomechanical model
of Delp et al. (1990). These moments were simulated with SIMM (Delp and Loan, 1995,
Delp et al., 1990).



4.3      Results

The maximal isometric hip flexion moment determined with the TLEM shows small
deviations (<30 Nm) with respect to the moments based on the model of Delp et al. (1990)
(figure 2). The moment curve falls within the 95% confidence interval (CI) of the maximal
voluntary moment measured by Inman et al. (1981), except for the small CI (12 Nm) at 40º
hip flexion. Yet, at 45º hip flexion the simulated moment falls within the CI of the flexion
moment measured by Cahalan et al. (1989). The flexion moment at 10º hip flexion
determined with the TLEM and Delp’s model falls outside the CI of the moment reported
by Cahalan et al. (1989) and is around 80 Nm smaller. The maximal isometric hip extension
moment falls within the CI of the different studies (Waters et al., 1974, Nemeth and
Ohlsen, 1985, Cahalan et al., 1989). In vivo studies show an increase in joint extension
moment with an increase of flexion angle. However, in our simulations between 45º and
75º a small decrease of 38 Nm is observed. Moments determined with the model of Delp
show a decrease of 120 Nm from 40º to 120º hip flexion. In comparison to other joint
axes, a relatively large contribution of passive forces can be observed for hip extension (up
to 33% of total moment at maximal flexion), which is in agreement with in vivo measured
passive forces (Yoon and Mansour, 1982).
Hip internal and external rotation moments simulated with the TLEM fall within the CI of
the moments measured by Cahalan et al. (1989). The same counts for moments simulated
with Delp’s model. More in vivo data with respect to this joint axis are lacking in the
literature.
72                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Chapter 4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                 300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hip external ( ← ) / internal ( → ) rotation moment (Nm)
hip extension ( ← ) / flexion ( → ) moment (Nm)




                                                                                 200                                                                                                                                                                                            100


                                                                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50


                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                     -100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -50
                                                                     -200


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -100
                                                                     -300



                                                                     -400                                                                                                                                                                                                      -150
                                                                        -40                                -20       0        20         40        60        80        100             120                                                                                        -50    -40      -30     -20     -10        0       10      20       30        40   50
                                                                                                                  hip extension ( ← ) / flexion ( → ) angle (deg)                                                                                                                                hip external ( ← ) / internal ( → ) rotation angle (deg)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               500
                                                                                                  300



                                                                                                                                                                                              knee flexion ( ← ) / extension ( → ) moment (Nm)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               400
                                     hip abduction ( ← ) / adduction ( → ) moment (Nm)




                                                                                                  200

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               300

                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               200

                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100


                                                                                                  -100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                  -200                                                                                                                                                                  -100



                                                                                                  -300                                                                                                                                                                  -200
                                                                                                     -50    -40     -30     -20      -10        0      10        20          30         40                                                                                 -120           -100        -80         -60         -40        -20                0        20
                                                                                                                   hip abduction ( ← ) / adduction ( → ) angle (deg)                                                                                                                              knee flexion ( ← ) / extension ( → ) angle (deg)


                                                                                                  100                                                                                                                                                                                    Waters et al. (1974), 8 w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nemeth et al. (1983), 10 m&w
                                       plantar flexion ( ← ) / dorsal flexion ( → ) moment (Nm)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cahalan et al.(1989), 17 m
                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                                                                  Inman et al. (1981), 3 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Olsen et al. (1972), 30 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Johnson et al. (2004), 38 w
                                                                                                  -100                                                                                                                                                                                   Murray et al. (1968), 20 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Arokoski et al. (2002), 30 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Murray et al.(1977), 24 m
                                                                                                  -200                                                                                                                                                                                   Inman et al. (1981) 4 ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pincivero et al. (2004), 14 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Welsch et al. (1998), 77 m&w
                                                                                                  -300                                                                                                                                                                                   Sale et al. (1982), 20 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Maganaris (2003), 8 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Marsh et al. (1981), 25 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Miyamoto et al.(2003), 8 m
                                                                                                  -400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fukanaga et al. (1996), 8 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Delp et al. (1990)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TLEM active + passive
                                                                                                  -500
                                                                                                     -60   -50     -40      -30     -20     -10        0      10       20         30         40                                                                                          TLEM active
                                                                                                                  plantar flexion ( ← ) / dorsal flexion ( → ) angle (deg)                                                                                                               TLEM uncorrected




Figure 2 Maximal isometric moments with respect to generalized coordinates of the model in comparison with in
vivo studies and Delp et al. (1990). The solid line shows the sum of active and passive component, the dotted line
shows the contribution of the active muscles only. The non varying joints were in initial joint position as in the in
vivo studies. Except for internal and external rotation, moments were determined in 60º hip flexion and 90º
flexion as in the study of Cahalan et al. (1969). For knee extension the hip was flexed 90 degrees as in the seating
position in the in vivo studies. ‘TLEM uncorrected’ represents the knee extension and plantar flexion moment
without adaptation in patella and achilles tendon length. For in vivo values the 95% confidence interval (2 times
SD) is plotted. Number of subjects and the gender (m/w) is mentioned in the legend.
A comparison of maximal isometric moments with the literature                               73



As for the model of Delp, simulated hip adduction moment fall outside the CI of some
studies (Cahalan et al., 1989, Johnson et al., 2004), but resemble well with other studies
(Murray and Sepic, 1968, Arokoski et al., 2002). In agreement with in vivo measurements
(Olson et al., 1972, Cahalan et al., 1989, Murray and Sepic, 1968), the simulated hip
abduction curve shows an increase in moment from 50º to 5º abduction. But in contrast to
Delp’s model, the values fall outside the CI. The literature is ambiguous about this
amplitude. The joint moment determined with the TLEM falls within the CI of the joint
moments reported by Arokoksi et al. (2002) and Johnson et al. (2004); the latter reported
normalized moments which were scaled to the dimensions of the specimen in the current
study. From -5º to 20º adduction our results show a decrease in moment which is not
observed in the in vivo studies and only to a limited extend in moments determined with
Delp’s model.
For knee extension and plantar flexion a large deviation of angle of peak moment was
found with respect to the unambiguous data from the literature. By lengthening the patella
and Achilles tendon with 5 cm a reasonable fit was obtained. In vivo measured knee
extension moment peaks at 60º, where the moment based on our simulations peaks at 10º
before and 55º after correction; the moment based on Delp’s model peaks at 30º. The
shape of the corrected moment curve resembles well with the data reported in the literature
(Murray et al., 1977, Pincivero et al., 2004, Welsch et al., 1998). In most cases the amplitude
of the knee extension moment falls in the lower regions of CI of the different studies. The
effect of the lengthening of the tendon of rectus femoris on the hip joint moment was
minimal, therefore only the corrected moments are plotted in figure 2. Just as for the
model of Delp, the simulated knee flexion moment corresponds reasonably well with the
range of in vivo measured moments, although at knee angles between 30º and 60º the slight
decrease of knee flexion moment (Inman et al., 1981, Welsch et al., 1998, Murray et al.,
1977) was not observed in the simulated moment. The lengthening of the Achilles tendon
resulted in a shift to the right of peak knee flexion moment. Figure 2 shows the corrected
plot.
The inter-individual differences in dorsal flexion moments reported in the literature were
small (CI < 6 Nm) (Fukunaga et al., 1996, Marsh et al., 1981). The shape of the simulated
dorsal flexion moment curve is comparable with the study from Fukunaga et al. (1996).
However the amplitude is around 2 times lower and more in agreement with the study of
Marsh et al. (1981). The shape of the corrected plantar flexion moment curve is
comparable with the in vivo studies (Maganaris, 2003, Sale et al., 1982, Miyamoto and Oda,
2003, Fukunaga et al., 1996) The moment curve peaks around 10º dorsal flexion, which
corresponds with the joint moment curve measured by Maganaris et al. (2003) and Sale et
al. (1982) and the simulated moment based on Delp’s model.
A study reporting measurements of maximal isometric moments for subtalar inversion and
eversion was not found in the literature, so a comparison could not be made.
74                                                                                    Chapter 4




4.4      Discussion

The goal of this study was to evaluate the validity of the force generating properties of the
TLEM, a comprehensive musculoskeletal model presented by Klein Horsman et al.
(2007b). It was impossible to measure the actual maximal isometric moments on the
specimen on which this model is based (Klein Horsman et al., 2007a). Therefore the
accuracy of the model is evaluated by comparing simulated maximal isometric moments
with maximal voluntary torque measurements from the literature. For a functional and
reliable model it is essential that simulated moments reasonably correspond with in vivo
measured moments. Unrealistic large deviations caused by inaccuracies in the
representation of the mechanical effect of the muscles will lead to errors when the model is
further utilized. For example, inaccurate determination of maximal muscle force results in
inaccurate constraints for an optimization criterion in order to solve the load sharing
problem. This will subsequently lead to an unreliable estimation of muscle force.



4.4.1    Comparison with maximal voluntary moment

The simulated moment curves are compared with maximal voluntary moment curves from
the literature based on shape, angle of peak moment and amplitude. Unfortunately, there are
three causes that partly hindered the evaluation of the validity of the model based on this
comparison.
The first is absence or limitedness of data. A comparison with in vivo subtalar inversion
moments could not be made since these data are lacking in literature. Arokoski et al. (2002),
Cahalan et al. (1989), Johnson et al. (2004) and Murray et al. (1968) report only one or two
data points, which is insufficient to make a comparison of the shape of the curve.
The second cause is that for some joint moments the literature is ambiguous. A clear example
is the amplitude of adduction moment reported for men (age 40-81 years) in neutral position
by Cahalan et al. (1989) which is two times smaller than the moment reported by Murray et al.
(1968) (men, age 40-55 years). These deviations are caused by inter-individual variations and
differences in methodology. The first group measured moments in a standing position in a
frame with handles for body stabilizing, the second in a prone position during bilateral
contractions. For the given example it is not possible to consider one study 100% reliable in
comparison to the other since both studies can be considered reliable despite their limitations.
Other studies show small variations (e.g. for knee extension), which enables an evaluation of
the model validity. If the curve falls within the 95% CI of the different studies the model
output is considered trustworthy.
The third cause that hindered the validation is the unknown level of activation and specific
tension in the in vivo experiments. Due to neurological limitations, limited motivation or in
order to reduce unwanted joint moments of muscles that span multiple joint axes, a maximal
A comparison of maximal isometric moments with the literature                                 75



voluntary contraction does not correspond with a full excitation of all motor units (Enoka,
1988). Several studies report activation levels, roughly varying from 85 to 95% (see for
overview (de Ruiter et al., 2004)). Nonetheless, the exact level in the experiments remains
uncertain and might even be lower, for example due to limited training. Specific tension is
used in musculoskeletal models to scale its strength in order to fit in vivo data. In Delp’s
model a high specific tension of 61 N/cm2 was required, which falls outside the wide range
reported in the literature (15 – 47 N/m2 according overview of Fukunaga et al. (1996)). This
indicates that this model is based on atrophied specimens. The specific tension of 27 N/cm2
used in the TLEM falls within this range. This value is relatively low which is in agreement
with the relatively high muscle mass observed in the specimen (Klein Horsman et al., 2007a).
However, since different, on itself reliable, studies report ambiguous values, a validation of
the amplitude of moment curve is hampered.
Despite the three causes mentioned above, for some joints sufficient data are reported which
are in mutual agreement so that the validity of the model could be evaluated by comparison
of shape and angle of peak moment. For example the hip extension moment increases with
increase of hip flexion angle in the three studies, which is in agreement with the moment
simulated with the TLEM. The results showed that in most cases simulated joint moments
fall within the total range of the different studies, which makes the model and its parameters
more reliable.
However, the comparison also showed limitation of the model. Unrealistic large deviations in
angle of peak moment were found for knee extension and plantar flexion (see uncorrected
curve in figure 2). There are a number of possible explanations. First is a change in
anatomical configuration after fixation. The joint angles at death might have been different
than the joint angles as measured after fixation. For example if the knee was more flexed at
death, a stretch out in tendons might have caused a change in joint angle. In this case the
measured sarcomere length corresponds to a different joint angle which would explain the
shift of peak moment. Secondly, the assumption was made that the muscles were fully
stretched and form a straight line when measured in the reference specimen position.
However, this is only approached when muscles are in maximal contraction, which was not
the case. For example the muscle belly of the triceps surae was loose and the Achilles tendon
arched towards the ankle as a result of the surrounding tissue. Therefore the foot can be lifted
until the muscle is stretched as assumed in the model. This shifts curve to the right. Thirdly,
the flexion between the talus and calcaneus was neglected in the model. This results in an
overestimation of the deformation in the soleus muscle element as in reality for a given ankle
flexion angle insertion comes closer to the origin due to flexion between the talus and
calcaneus. Relative dorsiflexion angles of 5º (SD 4º) were reported between these segments
during stance phase (Hamel et al., 2004). The fourth effect not taken into account is the
heterogeneity of sarcomere length. In rat semimembranosus muscle this effect augmented the
length range of the left flank of the f-l curve with 38 to 43% (Willems and Huijing, 1994). It is
plausible that with more detailed study, sarcomere distributions can be observed that will
influence the width of the force length curve and will lead to a shift of the peak moment.
76                                                                                                                                            Chapter 4



Finally, by reducing the complex 3D construction of muscle to a 1D Hill-type model muscle,
muscle deformation is described in a limited extend. For example, a possible lengthening of
fibers at the surface of a muscle belly as a result of the bulging the muscle belly in contraction,
is not accounted for. By lengthening both tendons with 5 cm the joint peak moment is
shifted resulting in a reasonable fit with in vivo data. These adaptations are recommended
when using the anatomical dataset of Klein Horsman et al. (2007a) in a 1D Hill-model (2007).



4.4.2      Comparison with Delp et al. (1990)

Although some differences can be observed in figure 2, for example for plantar flexion, in
general our simulations correspond well with curves generated with the public domain
model based on the work of Delp et al. (1990). However, similar simulated moments does
not necessary stand for equal contributions of the muscles, which can be seen in figure 3.

                                                                          25
                                                                                                                         TLEM
                       Hip flexion moment at 0 degrees hip flexion (Nm)




                                                                                                                         Delp et al. (1990)
                                                                          20



                                                                          15



                                                                          10



                                                                          5



                                                                          0
                                                                                 Tensor       Adductor   Adductor   Sartorius   Psoas Major
                                                                               Fascia Latae    Longus     Brevis

Figure 3 Contribution of a selection of hip-flexor muscles to maximal isometric hip flexion moment at 0º of hip
flexion in TLEM and model of Delp (1990).


This typical example shows that, although isometric moment at 0º hip flexion are equal,
differences in contributions of muscles can be eminent. These variations are mainly a result of
a sequence of in itself acceptable inter-individual variations in model parameters used to
determine the maximal isometric moment (e.g. PCSA, optimal fiber length, pennation angle,
moment arm). However, in Delp’s model, datasets are merged or missing data estimated in
order to fit in vivo data. The resulting model describes an anatomical configuration that never
existed. Since all parameters form a coherent and functional whole, possible subject-specific
relations such as the moment arm to fiber length ratio are lost, which is a disadvantage in
A comparison of maximal isometric moments with the literature                                 77



comparison to the TLEM. For example, in Delp’s model, optimal fiber lengths are based on 2
anatomical datasets (Wickiewicz et al., 1983, Friederich and Brand, 1990). Wickiewicz et al.
(1983) reported the number of sarcomeres in the fibers, but the corresponding joint angles
were not accurately defined. Friederich and Brand (1990) only measured the length of the
fiber. Therefore the angle at which a fiber is at optimal length had to be guessed. In this study
the moment arm, the deformation of a muscle element and thus the fiber length change is
determined for a given change in joint angle. Klein Horsman et al. (2007a) measured mean
sarcomere length of a specimen together with the joint angles, so that in the corresponding
model position the sarcomere length is known. With the measured fiber length, the number
of sarcomeres in series is determined and thus the force-length properties of the muscle fiber
as a function of joint angle.
For plantar flexion and knee extension moment this approach resulted in large deviations
with respect to in vivo data showing a limitation of the Hill-type muscle model. Such
limitations are concealed when one can select the most appropriate parameters from different
specimens or guess parameters that suit the best to end up with a functional model. For
example by selecting the longest muscle fiber and smallest moment arm from the available
datasets the desirable wide range of active muscle force might be obtained. The resulting
model may be functional but not necessary an accurate representation.



4.4.3    Concluding remarks

In this study anatomical parameters, collected on one subject, are implemented in a model
to determine maximal isometric moment. The simulations led in most cases to a reasonable
fit with maximal voluntary torque measurements from the literature, which makes this
model suitable for further inverse and forward dynamic analysis. This result is unique since
the model is based on one consistent dataset. The direct implementation of anatomical
parameters in this study also showed a shortcoming in the representation of plantar flexors
and knee extensors using a Hill model. Possible causes are described and with a relatively
easy solution it is shown that a reasonable fit can be obtained.

4.5      References

Arnold, A. S., Blemker, S. S.,Delp, S. L., 2001. Evaluation of a deformable musculoskeletal
         model for estimating muscle-tendon lengths during crouch gait. Annals of
         Biomedical Engineering, 29, 263-74.
Arokoski, M. H., Arokoski, J. P., Haara, M., Kankaanpaa, M., Vesterinen, M., Niemitukia, L.
         H.,Helminen, H. J., 2002. Hip Muscle Strength and Muscle Cross Sectional Area in
         Men with and without Hip Osteoarthritis. Journal of Rheumatology, 29, 2187-95.
Boone, D. C.,Azen, S. P., 1979. Normal range of motion of joints in male subjects. Journal of
         Bone and Joint Surgery, 61, 756-9.
78                                                                                   Chapter 4



Brand, R. A.,Crowinshield, R. D., 1982. A model of lower extremity muscular anatomy.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 104, 153-161.
Cahalan, T. D., Johnson, M. E., Liu, S.,Chao, E. Y., 1989. Quantitative measurements of hip
          strength in different age groups. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, 136-
          45.
De Ruiter, C. J., Kooistra, R. D., Paalman, M. I.,De Haan, A., 2004. Initial phase of maximal
          voluntary and electrically stimulated knee extension torque development at different
          knee angles. Journal of Applied Physiology, 97, 1693-701.
Delp, S. L.,Loan, J. P., 1995. A graphics-based software system to develop and analyze
          models of musculoskeletal structures. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 25, 21-
          34.
Delp, S. L., Loan, J. P., Hoy, M. G., Zajac, F. E., Topp, E. L.,Rosen, J. M., 1990. An
          interactive graphics-based model of the lower extremity to study orthopaedic
          surgical procedures. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 37, 757-67.
Enoka, R. M., 1988. Muscle strength and its development. New perspectives. Sports
          Medicine, 6, 146-68.
Friederich, J. A.,Brand, R. A., 1990. Muscle fiber architecture in the human lower limb.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 23, 91-5.
Fukunaga, T., Roy, R. R., Shellock, F. G., Hodgson, J. A.,Edgerton, V. R., 1996. Specific
          tension of human plantar flexors and dorsiflexors. Journal of Applied Physiology,
          80, 158-65.
Hamel, A. J., Sharkey, N. A., Buczek, F. L.,Michelson, J., 2004. Relative motions of the tibia,
          talus, and calcaneus during the stance phase of gait: a cadaver study. Gait and
          Posture, 20, 147-53.
Inman, V. T., Ralston, H. J.,Todd, F. 1981 Human Walking, Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins.
Johnson, M. E., Mille, M. L., Martinez, K. M., Crombie, G.,Rogers, M. W., 2004. Age-related
          changes in hip abductor and adductor joint torques. Archives of Physical Medicine
          and Rehabilitation, 85, 593-7.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F., Van Der Helm, F. C., Prose, L. P.,Veeger, H. E.,
          2007a. Morphological muscle and joint parameters for musculoskeletal modelling of
          the lower extremity. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol, Avon), 22, 239-47.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F. J. M., Veeger, H. E. J.,Van Der Helm, F. C. T.,
          2007b. Musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity: a comparison of muscle
          moment arms with the literature. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
          [submitted].
Maganaris, C. N., 2003. Force-length characteristics of the in vivo human gastrocnemius
          muscle. Clinical Anatomy, 16, 215-23.
Marsh, E., Sale, D., Mccomas, A. J.,Quinlan, J., 1981. Influence of joint position on ankle
          dorsiflexion in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology, 51, 160-7.
Miyamoto, N.,Oda, S., 2003. Mechanomyographic and electromyographic responses of the
          triceps surae during maximal voluntary contractions. Journal of Electromyography
          and Kinesiology, 13, 451-9.
Murray, M. P., Baldwin, J. M., Gardner, G. M., Sepic, S. B.,Downs, W. J., 1977. Maximum
          isometric knee flexor and extensor muscle contractions: normal patterns of torque
          versus time. Physical Therapy, 57, 637-43.
Murray, M. P.,Sepic, S. B., 1968. Maximum isometric torque of hip abductor and adductor
          muscles. Physical Therapy, 48, 1327-1335.
Nemeth, G.,Ohlsen, H., 1985. In vivo moment arm lengths for hip extensor muscles at
          different angles of hip flexion. Journal of Biomechanics, 18, 129-40.
A comparison of maximal isometric moments with the literature                                79



Olson, V. L., Smidt, G. L.,Johnston, R. C., 1972. The maximum torque generated by the
          eccentric, isometric, and concentric contractions of the hip abductor muscles.
          Physical Therapy, 52, 149-58.
Pierrynowski, M. R., 1995. Analytic representation of muscle line of action and geometry, in:
          Allard, P., Stokes, I. A. F. & Blanchi, J. P. (Eds.) Three-Dimensional Analysis of
          Human Movement. Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL, pp. 214-256.
Pincivero, D. M., Salfetnikov, Y., Campy, R. M.,Coelho, A. J., 2004. Angle- and gender-
          specific quadriceps femoris muscle recruitment and knee extensor torque. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 37, 1689-97.
Powell, P. L., Roy, R. R., Kanim, P., Bello, M. A.,Edgerton, V. R., 1984. Predictability of
          skeletal muscle tension from architectural determinations in guinea pig hindlimbs.
          Journal of Applied Physiology, 57, 1715-21.
Sale, D., Quinlan, J., Marsh, E., Mccomas, A. J.,Belanger, A. Y., 1982. Influence of joint
          position on ankle plantarflexion in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology, 52,
          1636-42.
Spector, S. A., Gardiner, P. F., Zernicke, R. F., Roy, R. R.,Edgerton, V. R., 1980. Muscle
          architecture and force-velocity characteristics of cat soleus and medial
          gastrocnemius: implications for motor control. Journal of Neurophysiology, 44,
          951-60.
Spoor, C. W., Van Leeuwen, J. L., Van Der Meulen, W. J.,Huson, A., 1991. Active force-
          length relationship of human lower-leg muscles estimated from morphological data:
          a comparison of geometric muscle models. European Journal of Morphology, 29,
          137-60.
Van Der Linden, B. J., Koopman, H. F., Huijing, P. A.,Grootenboer, H. J., 1998. Revised
          planimetric model of unipennate skeletal muscle: a mechanical approach. Clinical
          Biomechanics (Bristol, Avon), 13, 256-260.
Waters, R. L., Perry, J., Mcdaniels, M. D.,House, K., 1974. The relative strength of the
          hamstrings during hip extension. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 56, 1592-1597.
Weber, E., 1851. Über die langenverhaltnisse der fleischfasern der muskeln im algemeinen.
          Berichte u. d. Verh. d. Konigl. Sachs. Ges. d. Wiss. Math.-Phys. CL., 5-86.
Weijs, W. A.,Hillen, B., 1985. Cross-sectional areas and estimated intrinsic strength of the
          human jaw muscles. Acta Morphologica Neerlando-Scandinavica, 23, 267-74.
Welsch, M. A., Williams, P. A., Pollock, M. L., Graves, J. E., Foster, D. N.,Fulton, M. N.,
          1998. Quantification of full-range-of-motion unilateral and bilateral knee flexion and
          extension torque ratios. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 79, 971-8.
Wickiewicz, T. L., Roy, R. R., Powell, P. L.,Edgerton, V. R., 1983. Muscle architecture of the
          human lower limb. Clinical Orthopaedics, 275-83.
Willems, M. E.,Huijing, P. A., 1994. Heterogeneity of mean sarcomere length in different
          fibres: effects on length range of active force production in rat muscle. European
          Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 68, 489-96.
Winters, J. M.,Stark, L., 1985. Analysis of fundamental human movement patterns through
          the use of in-depth antagonistic muscle models. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
          Engineering, 32, 826-39.
Winters, J. M.,Stark, L., 1988. Estimated mechanical properties of synergistic muscles
          involved in movements of a variety of human joints. Journal of Biomechanics, 21,
          1027-41.
Yoon, Y. S.,Mansour, J. M., 1982. The passive elastic moment at the hip. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 15, 905-10.
                                                            Chapter 5




Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach for

the lower extremity


M.D. Klein Horsman, H.F.J.M. Koopman, H.E.J. Veeger and F.C.T. van der Helm
Submitted to Journal of Biomechanics, 2007
Abstract

In this study muscle forces were optimized during gait using a 21-degree-of-freedom
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity. The model is based on a comprehensive and
consistent anatomical dataset. Muscle forces were optimized using a novel inverse-forward
dynamic optimization (IFDO) algorithm which takes excitation and activation dynamics
into account. A recently proposed energy related cost function was utilized, which resulted
in a good correspondence with muscle energy consumption. Input joint kinematics during
gait were obtained and used as input for the model. Simulations resulted in a stable, fast
and accurate estimation of muscle forces. Measured EMG agreed with predicted neural
inputs. Estimated joint compression forces were consistent with published in vivo
measurements of joint forces; differences were attributed to inter-individual differences in
joint torques. This study showed that the effects of model assumptions were eminent.
IFDO prevented unrealistic fast transitions in force, which were present in other studies
that exclude the effect of excitation and activation dynamics. The energy related cost
function induced synergistic muscle activity in which also small muscles participate. This is
an improvement when compared to traditional cost functions based on only muscle force
and cross sectional area. Anatomical parameters of the current model were based on
consistent anatomical data. In contrast with other studies, no merging and tuning of
anatomical datasets was required to obtain a good fit with EMG and compression forces,
which enhances the reliability of the current model predictions.
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                               83




5.1      Introduction

Accurate estimation of muscle forces exerted during human movement is useful in clinical
practice. With these muscle forces tissue loads can be estimated and muscle function
and/or malfunction can be characterized. The use of musculoskeletal models for this
purpose has been widely reported in the literature (see for review (Erdemir et al., 2007)). In
general, two approaches can be distinguished. In the first, the inverse-dynamic approach,
experimentally acquired kinematic data are used to estimate muscle forces. Typically, an
objective function (such as the sum of individual muscle tensions) is minimized, resulting
in a load sharing over a redundant number of muscles (see for review (Tsirakos et al.,
1997)). Secondly, in the forward-dynamic approach, the equations of motion are integrated
with muscle forces as input and the resulting segment movement as output. Since the
system is underdetermined, muscle forces are optimized (e.g. to achieve maximal jumping
height (Anderson and Pandy, 1999)). The current study aims at the estimation of muscle
forces in the inverse-dynamic approach.
Although model-based estimations of muscle force showed to have clinical potential, many
challenges still have to be overcome. Firstly, in many models muscle force can
instantaneously drop to zero or rise to maximal force (An et al., 1984, Pedersen et al., 1997,
Li et al., 1999, Heller et al., 2001). Yet, in reality muscular dynamics will prevent such fast
transitions in force. Secondly, objective functions based upon mechanical measures such as
muscle force or stress are frequently used (Glitsch and Baumann, 1997, Crowninshield and
Brand, 1981, Heller et al., 2001). However, the validity of these functions is unknown. A
recent study posed an energy-related cost function that had a better correspondence with
muscle energy consumption than cost functions based on muscle stress (Praagman et al.,
2006). Thirdly, since the objective function and its boundaries are a function of anatomical
parameters, the outcome of a muscle force optimization is highly dependent on such data.
Frequently used datasets are either incomplete (see for review (Yamaguchi et al., 1990)) or
constructed by merging of datasets based on different individuals (Delp et al., 1990). This
might result in possible inaccuracies caused by inter-individual anatomical differences and
co-variance between parameters.
The present study is part of a larger project aiming to develop an inverse and forward 3D
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity allowing clinicians to evaluate if-then
scenarios with respect to diagnosis and treatment of gait disorders. As a first step, we have
collected a comprehensive anatomical dataset (Klein Horsman et al., 2007a) comprising the
relevant anatomical parameters that influence muscle force estimation (e.g. optimal fiber
length, PCSA, moment arms). All data were collected on one specimen making it a
consistent dataset. Based on these data a musculoskeletal model was constructed. The
validity of the model was evaluated by comparing muscle moment arms and maximal
isometric moments with the literature (Klein Horsman et al., 2007b, Klein Horsman et al.,
84                                                                                Chapter 5



2007c). In the current study dynamic muscle properties were incorporated in the model.
Muscle forces and activation patterns during gait are optimized using an inverse forward
dynamic optimization (IFDO) method, which takes muscle dynamics into account (Van
der Kooij and van der Helm, 2003). A recently proposed energy related cost function is
used, that showed a good correspondence with energy consumption (Praagman et al.,
2006).
The aim of this study is to evaluate the dynamic properties of the model by comparing (1)
calculated hip and knee compression forces with in vivo measurements of joint
compression forces obtained from the literature and (2) calculated muscle neural input with
in vivo measured EMG patterns during gait.



5.2      Methods

5.2.1    Twente Lower Extremity Model

The Twente Lower Extremity Model (TLEM) is a musculoskeletal model of the lower
extremity based on a measured anatomical dataset of a right lower extremity (Klein
Horsman et al., 2007a). The model consists of mutually connected elements, each
representing a relevant anatomical structure. The kinematic properties of these elements are
described by 21 degrees of freedom (DOF): the orientation and position of the pelvis in
3D together with 3 DOF for the L5S1 joint and the right and left hip and 1 DOF for the
knee, talocrural and subtalar joint. To describe the mechanical effect of 76 muscles of both
lower extremities, 264 muscle elements are defined in the model, which are considered as
independent actuators. A muscle element is defined by the position of origin and insertion.
‘Via’ points and geometric shapes are introduced when a muscle is curving around
intervening structures. Muscle parameters such as muscle mass, pennation angle,
physiological cross-sectional area (PCSA) and optimal fibre length, were assigned to each
muscle element (see for more detail (Klein Horsman et al., 2007b)).
To scale the geometry as defined in the TLEM to that of the subject from which the
experimental data were derived, each segment with its attachment sites was linearly scaled
to fit with the measured bony landmarks of each individual segment of the subject. With
the ratio between the original and scaled muscle elements lengths, tendon length and
optimal fiber length were scaled. PCSA was scaled with the subject mass/length ratio.
Segment mass and inertial parameters were determined using regression equations
(Chandler et al., 1975, Koopman, 1989)
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                               85



5.2.2        Muscle model

Muscle dynamics are described by a third-order Hill-type muscle model (Winters and Stark,
1985). Excitation dynamics are described by a linear first order model:
       u −e
e& =                                                                                  (1)
        τe
with u representing the input for neural activation and e as the neural excitation.
Activation dynamics are modeled by a non-linear first order differential equation:
       e−a
a& =                                                                                  (2)
        τ
with a as the active state and two different time constants for activation and de-activation:
    ⎧τ         ∀    e<a
τ = ⎨ da                                                                              (3)
    ⎩τ ac      ∀    e≥a
Time constants for neural excitation, activation and de-activation are based on empirical
relations (Winters and Stark, 1988). The force-velocity relationship of the contractile
element (CE) is described with a non-linear first order model, whereas the force-length
characteristics of the CE are described by a non-linear Gaussian equation. The force in the
series-elastic element (SE) and in the parallel-elastic element (PE) is described by an
exponential curve as a function of its corresponding length. These elements represent
respectively the elastic tendon properties and passive muscle properties. The muscle model
has the following state variables: length of CE, excitation and active state.

5.2.3        Measurement and analysis of gait dynamics

To evaluate the dynamic properties of the TLEM, gait dynamics of a healthy male subject
(age 21, length 1.85 m, leg length (defined as distance between lateral malleolus and
anterior iliac spine) 1.01 m, mass 85 kg) were obtained at a walking speed of 1.5 m/s. A
Vicon motion analysis system (50 Hz, Oxford Metrics, UK) was used to collect 3D body
marker position. 3D Ground reaction force (GRF) was measured with two AMTI force
plates (1000 Hz, Watertown, MA). Surface EMG of the following muscles were measured:
m. Biceps Femoris, m. Vastus Lateralis, m. Gastrocnemius Medialis, and m. Tibialis
Anterior. These data were collected using an EMG system at 1024 Hz (Porti, TMS
International). Electrodes (Medi-trace Ag/AgCl) were attached according to SENIAM
guidelines (Hermens et al., 2000). First raw EMG was high pass filtered (3rd order, zero-
phase lag, Butterworth, cut-off, 20 Hz) then rectified, smoothed (2nd order low pass zero-
phase lag, Butterworth, cut-off 25 Hz) and synchronized with Vicon system. Joint angles
were determined with an inverse rigid-body dynamics model (Koopman et al., 1995) using
the measured marker positions. Kinematic data and external forces were filtered using a 2nd
order Butterworth filter (cut-off 5 Hz).
86                                                                                             Chapter 5



5.2.4     Objective function

To calculate muscle forces during gait an energy related cost function was minimized. This
function (equation 4), as introduced by Praagman et al. (2006), represents the two major
energy-consuming processes in a muscle. The first is the detachment of cross bridges
which depends on fiber length li in muscle i and its muscle force Fi (first term in equation
4). The second process is the re-uptake of calcium depending on muscle mass mi and the
muscle activation, defined as the ratio of actual muscle force and maximal force at a certain
length. This ratio is represented as a second order polynomial equation (second and third
term in equation 4) in which f(l) represents the force-length dependency and σmax the
specific muscle tension, set to 45 N/cm2. Values c1 and c2 were respectively set to 100 and 4
and chosen such that the contribution of linear and non-linear terms is equal at 50%
activation (Praagman et al., 2006).



5.2.5     Inverse forward dynamic optimization

IFDO (Van der Kooij and van der Helm, 2003) was used to estimate muscle forces during
gait. This method to solve the load sharing problem accounts for muscular dynamics. At
each time step at a given state of the muscle model, the minimal and maximal feasible
muscle force was determined by integrating a forward muscle model. This results in
respectively a lower limit (Fi,low-lim) and upper limit (Fi,up-lim) (equation 5) for each of the 264
muscle elements in the model. These constraints prevent an instantaneous drop to zero or
increase to maximum in the optimized muscle force Fi. After the muscle force was
estimated, an inverse model was applied to update the state variables that correspond with
the optimized muscle force. In order to satisfy the equations of motion, a second
constraint enforces the contribution of the muscles to equilibrate the measured joint
moment Mj (equation 5), with ri,j representing muscle moment arm of muscle i with respect
to joint axes j. The 5 DOF in the hip, knee and ankle joint were optimized in this study. In
its entirety the optimization procedure can be described as follows:

                n
                                         Fi                              Fi
min J = ∑ Fi li + mi c1 (                               +c2 (                           )2 )    (4)
               i =1             PCSA ⋅ σ max ⋅ f (l )           PCSA ⋅ σ max ⋅ f (l )

Subject to:

Fi ,low−lim < Fi < Fi ,up−lim              i = 1,...,264                                        (5)
         n
M j + ∑ Fi ⋅ ri , j = 0                       i = 1,...,264          j = 1,...,5                (6)
        i =1
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                             87



5.2.6    Evaluation of validity

With the joint kinematics and external forces as model input, muscle forces were optimized
as described above. Together with gravitational and inertial forces the hip and knee
compression forces were calculated and compared with in vivo measured contact forces
(Bergmann et al., 2001, Hardwick et al., 2006) in order to evaluate the validity of the model
outputs. Secondly, the measured EMG was compared with the neural inputs as predicted
by the TLEM.
In addition, to investigate the effect of model assumptions on the model output, a
comparison is made with common methods: (i) Besides IFDO, muscle forces were
optimized in a so called inverse-dynamic optimization (IDO). For IDO muscle force
boundaries were set between zero and a static maximal force depending on PCSA. The
boundaries are independent of the activation level, which allows instant switching between
maximal and zero muscle force. (ii) For a comparison with the energy related cost function,
the sum of muscle force and the sum of squared muscle tension were also minimized.
Finally, (iii) the effect of the number of DOF and (iv) the specific tension on the estimated
hip compression force was investigated.



5.3      Results

5.3.1    Joint moments

Joint moments of the subject during gait determined with the TLEM fall reasonably well
within the range found in the literature (figure 1). Even after the normalization of the
different studies to subject length and weight, a relatively large variation in amplitude was
found (Bowsher and Vaughan, 1995, Cappozzo et al., 1975, Heller et al., 2001, Glitsch and
Baumann, 1997, Winter, 1990, Perry, 1992). For example the normalized peak hip flexion
moment obtained with the TLEM is 33% larger when compared to the moment reported
by Heller et al. (2001). On the other hand, Bowhser et al (1995) reported a flexion moment
that is two times larger than the moment reported in the current study. Walking velocities
were comparable (1.4-1.5 m/s).
88                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chapter 5




                                                                                           8                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                  current model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            current model
Normalized hip flexion ( ← ) / extension ( → ) torque



                                                                                                                  Cappozzo et al.(1975)




                                                                                                                                                                            Normalized hip internal ( ← ) / external ( → ) torque
                                                                                           6                      Heller et al.(2001)                                                                                                                                                       Heller et al.(2001)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6                                                    Bowsher et al. (1995)
                                                                                                                  Winter (1991)
                                                                                           4                      Bowsher et al. (1995)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                 −2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.2
                                                                                 −4


                                                                                 −6                                                                                                                                                 −0.4


                                                                                 −8                                                                                                                                                 −0.6
                                                                                                10   20   30   40    50       60   70       80     90     100                                                                                 10    20    30    40    50       60    70       80     90    100
                                                                                                                % of gait cycle                                                                                                                                  % of gait cycle



                                                                                            8                                                                                                                                        4                                                   current model
               Normalized hip adduction ( ← ) / abduction ( → ) torque




                                                                                                                                          current model


                                                                                                                                                                  Normalized knee extension ( ← ) / flexion ( → ) torque
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cappozzo et al. (1975)
                                                                                            7                                             Heller et al. (2001)                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Winter (1990)
                                                                                                                                          Glitsch et al. (1997)                                                                                                                          Glitsch et al. (1997)
                                                                                            6                                             Bowsher et al. (1995)                                                                      2

                                                                                            5                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                            4                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                            3                                                                                                                                       −1

                                                                                            2                                                                                                                                       −2

                                                                                            1                                                                                                                                       −3

                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                       −4

                                                                                           −1                                                                                                                                       −5

                                                                                           −2                                                                                                                                       −6
                                                                                                10   20   30   40    50       60   70       80      90    100                                                                                10    20    30    40    50       60    70      80     90     100
                                                                                                                % of gait cycle                                                                                                                                 % of gait cycle
                       Normalized ankle dorsiflexion ( ← ) / plantarflexion ( → ) torque




                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                        current model
                                                                                           12                                           Cappozzo et al. (1975)
                                                                                                                                        Winter et al. (1991)
                                                                                           10                                           Perry (1992)


                                                                                            8

                                                                                            6

                                                                                            4

                                                                                            2

                                                                                            0

                                                                                           −2

                                                                                           −4
                                                                                                10   20   30   40    50       60   70       80     90    100
                                                                                                                % of gait cycle




Figure 1 Joint moments with respect to the hip, knee and ankle during the gait cycle determined with the TLEM
in comparison to joint moments reported in the literature. Moments were scaled to subject weight and length.
Perry (1992) and Glitsch et al. (1997) only reported joint moment in the stance phase. Reported walking speeds
are between 1.4 and 1.5 m/s. 0% (and 100%) gait cycle represent heel strike
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                                                                                      89



5.3.2      Joint compression force: comparison with in vivo data

As for joint moments, differences in hip compression forces reported in the literature are
large. Model simulations resulted in hip peak force varying from 296 up to 769 % body
weight (%BW) (see Bergmann et al (1993) for an overview). Bergmann et al. (2001) reported
hip compression forces measured in vivo with an instrumented hip prosthesis at a walking
velocity that matches with the walking velocity in the current study. Hip compression force
determined with the TLEM using IFDO and the energy related cost function (equation 4)
correspond well with these data (figure 2), apart from the second force peak at 50% gait cycle
which is around 200 %BW higher in the current study. Since the three measured hip
moments that induced this relatively high peak are much larger than the moments
corresponding to the in vivo measurements (see moments of Heller et al. (2001) in figure 1)
such a difference is agreement with the results of Bergmann et al. (2001). For example, hip
abduction moment in the current study peaks at 4 at 50% gait cycle, in contrast to the
adduction moment reported by Heller which crosses zero at 50% (see figure 1).
The knee compression peak force optimized for 1 DOF (flexion/extension) was 281 %BW
for the first and 227 %BW for the second peak. Adding 1 DOF (add/abduction) to the knee
joint caused an increase in joint force of 45 %BW. No optimal solution was found for a
complete gait cycle when additionally internal/external rotation moment was included in the
optimization, indicating that other structures such as ligaments contribute to the joint
moment generated with respect to this axis. In a recent study a peak knee compression force
during gait were measured in an 80 year old subject of 213 %BW three weeks post-
operatively up to 280 %BW one year post operatively with an instrumented prosthesis
(Hardwick et al., 2006). Since walking velocity and accompanying joint moments were not
reported in this study, this result only indicates that the knee compression force calculated
with the TLEM (280 %BW) falls well within the reported range.
                                                      450

                                                                                                       calculated with TLEM
                                                      400
                                                                                                       measured in vivo (Bergmann et al. (2001))
              Hip Compression Force (% Body Weight)




                                                      350


                                                      300


                                                      250


                                                      200


                                                      150


                                                      100


                                                       50


                                                        0
                                                            10   20   30   40        50           60    70          80          90         100
                                                                                % of gait cycle

Figure 2 Hip compression force during the gait cycle as calculated with the TLEM (solid line). The dashed lines
represent multiple trials as measured in vivo with instrumented hip prostheses (Bergmann et al. (2001). These in
vivo data were collected in two subjects at a comparable walking speed.
90                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 5



5.3.3                                        Calculated neural input compared to measured EMG

Measured EMG patterns are in general in agreement with the literature (Burden et al., 2003,
Winter and Yack, 1987). The neural input curve of the Biceps Femoris shows muscle
activity at the beginning of stand phase and at the end of the swing phase, which
corresponds well with the measured EMG pattern (see figure 3). In conformity with EMG
the Vastus Lateralis is active at early stance phase. At the end of the swing phase neural
input of the Vastus Lateralis is almost zero, which is in disagreement with measured EMG
showing a co-contraction, most likely to stabilize the knee at heel strike. The neural input
of the medial head of the gastrocnemius corresponds well to a large extent with the
measured EMG. The three peaks in Tibialis Anterior EMG were also found in the neural
input. The first peak shows a good fit with EMG, the second peak starts around 50%
instead of 60% as found for the EMG. This activity was required to compensate for the
relatively slow decrease in force of the triceps surae. The third peak in our neural input
results is much smaller than the peak in EMG.

                                                           biceps femoris                                                                                             vastus lateralis
                               80                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                Normalized muscle activity
Normalized muscle activity




                                                                                           neural input                                                                                              neural input
                               60                                                          EMG                                                                                                       EMG
                                                                                                                                                100

                               40
                                                                                                                                                 50
                               20

                               0                                                                                                                 0
                                        10    20   30    40     50      60       70   80        90        100                                         10   20   30   40     50      60     70   80        90        100
                                                          % of gait cycle                                                                                             % of gait cycle



                                                                                                                                                                       tibialis anterior
                                                        gastrocnemius medialis                                                                  200                                             neural input
                                                                                                                   Normalized muscle activity




                               150                                                                                                                                                              EMG
  Normalized muscle activity




                                                                                           neural input
                                                                                           EMG
                                                                                                                                                150
                               100
                                                                                                                                                100

                                50
                                                                                                                                                 50


                                    0                                                                                                             0
                                        10    20   30     40     50      60      70   80        90        100                                         10   20   30   40     50      60     70   80        90        100
                                                           % of gait cycle                                                                                            % of gait cycle



Figure 3 Predicted neural input (solid line) and measured EMG (dotted line). Neural input was scaled to the
maximal amplitude of the corresponding EMG.



5.3.4                                        Effect of model assumptions

The effect of model assumptions on model output is eminent.
      IFDO compared to IDO
In comparison with IFDO (figure 2), IDO caused a decrease of 55 %BW in the first peak
of the hip compression force curve. The force in the swing phase reached below 10 %BW
in mid-swing (80% of gait cycle), which is lower than the in vivo measured hip
compression forces showed in figure 2
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                                                       91



      Cost function
Differences in hip compression force for the three investigated cost functions were small
(< 40 %BW). However, at the level of in individual muscle force, differences can be large
(see figure 4). Smaller muscles are excluded or play a minor role when the muscle force is
optimized with the mechanically related cost functions (minimization of sum of muscle
forces or squared muscle stresses).
      Number of DOFs included in the optimization
In agreement with previous model simulations (Glitsch and Baumann, 1997) an increase in
the number of DOFs in the optimization resulted in an increase in hip compression forces
as more DOFs need to be equilibrated by the muscles. Including hip rotation moment in
the optimization resulted in a maximal increase of 52 %BW in the first peak. Including the
abduction moment in the optimization causes the largest increase in the second peak (152
%BW). Overall, the best fit with in vivo measured hip forces was obtained when the hip
was modeled with 3 DOF.
      Specific tension
Compression force increased with specific muscle tension. For example when using a
specific tension of 100 N/cm2 instead of 45 N/cm2 as in the current study, the first hip
force peak increased with 99 %BW. A specific tension of 45 N/cm2 showed a better fit
with in vivo measured compression forces and falls within the range of 15 – 47 N/m2 as
reported in the literature (Fukunaga et al., 1996).




Figure 4 Muscle force during gait in the Biceps Femoris and Adductor Brevis, respectively a relatively large (245 gram)
and small (115 gram) hip muscle. Since muscle mass is weighted, for the energy cost function the contribution of
smaller muscles is larger and the contribution of larger muscles is smaller when compared to forces based on the two
mechanically related cost functions (sum of muscle forces, sum of squared muscle stresses). Minimizing sum of
muscle forces resulted in a force in the Biceps Femoris that is around 15 times larger than the force in the Adductor
Brevis (respectively 475 and 30 N). With the energy cost function the force in the biceps is around 2 times the force in
the Adductor Brevis (respectively 300 and 160 N).
92                                                                                                              Chapter 5




5.4                                 Discussion

In this study muscle forces are optimized using the TLEM, a recently introduced
musculoskeletal model. The model can be distinguished from other models by its inverse
forward dynamic optimization method, cost function and consistent anatomical data.



5.4.1                               Accuracy and limitations of validation methods

Since direct measurement of muscle forces in vivo is difficult, typically musculoskeletal
models are validated by comparing model output with EMG and joint compression forces.
For quantitative validation of the predicted load sharing in vivo measured joint
compression force is the only available source providing insight in the actual load acting on
the joint. Unfortunately, the availability of these data is very limited. Just recently, the first
in vivo collected knee compression forces were reported, measured using an instrumented
tibial prosthesis (D'Lima et al., 2006, Hardwick et al., 2006). This makes a comparison of
predicted knee compression forces possible. However, other accompanying biomechanical
measures such as walking velocities and joint torques were not reported, which hampers an
extensive inter-individual comparison. For the hip these data are available (Bergmann et al.,
2001). Therefore, although collected on other subjects, these data provide more insight
whether model outputs are reasonable or not.
The comparison with EMG in this study is accurate. First, EMG and gait kinematics were
measured simultaneously on the same subject which makes a comparison more
straightforward than a comparison with EMG patterns from different subjects (e.g. (Thelen
et al., 2003)). Secondly, EMG was compared with neural input instead of muscle as has
been previously done (e.g. (Anderson and Pandy, 2001)). A comparison with neural input is
more accurate as neural excitation and calcium dynamics are taken into account (figure 5).
                                    140                  Gastrocnemius Medialis

                                    120
                                                                                                EMG
       Normalized muscle activity




                                                                                                Neural input
                                    100
                                                                                                Force
                                    80

                                    60

                                    40

                                    20

                                     0
                                          10   20   30      40         50        60   70   80     90           100
                                                                 % of gait cycle

Figure 5 Measured EMG of the gastrocnemius medialis (thin solid line) compared to predicted neural input (thick
line) and muscle force (dotted) both scaled to EMG amplitude, showing a better fit for the neural input due to the
including of activation and excitation dynamics.
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                            93



5.4.2    Anatomical model parameters

The prediction of muscle forces is highly dependent on the geometry of the model. In the
ideal case anatomical parameters are subject-specific in order to account for architectural
differences between subjects. However, with the available methods to obtain these data,
such as MRI and CT, important muscle parameters such as optimal fiber length cannot be
determined for an individual yet. Therefore musculoskeletal models are generally based on
cadaver studies. The TLEM has three advantages when compared to other models.
First, the model is based on an anatomical dataset comprising all relevant geometric
parameters for muscle force estimation. Where other models (e.g. (Delp et al., 1990)) are
constructed by merging different datasets and estimations of missing parameters such as
optimal fiber length, the current model is based on consistent, experimentally obtained data
(Klein Horsman et al., 2007a).
Secondly, the TLEM consists of an extensive number of muscle elements which expand
the possible solutions to share the load such that all DOF are involved; making the
estimation of tissue load becomes more realistic. Muscle forces generating a required
moment with respect to one axis might result in an unwanted moment with respect to
another axis, requiring compensation by other muscles, causing an increase in joint force.
An insufficient number of muscle elements results in an overestimation of the compression
force. This effect explains the unrealistically high hip compression force (around 600
%BW) found by Glitsch and Baumann (1997) when optimizing 3 DOF in the hip using
only 47 muscle elements (Brand et al., 1982).
Finally, since force length characteristics are accurately implemented based on sarcomere
length measurements, cost functions based on these parameters as presented by Praagman
et al. (2006) can be implemented, which are likely to improve muscle force estimation.
Scaling of the model to the subject is relevant in order to minimize anatomical differences
between the model and the subject. Segment dimensions were scaled using externally
measurable segment dimensions of the subject, which resulted in a more accurate joint
moment determination. Internal anatomical properties such as muscle parameters and
wrapping surfaces, important for estimation of muscle forces, were also scaled with these
external measures. It is expected that scaling of these parameters minimizes anatomical
differences and thus improves the accuracy of estimation of muscle forces. However, to
what extent remains uncertain, as these parameters could not be measured.



5.4.3    IFDO

IFDO is a fast and stable algorithm for inverse-dynamic optimization. In comparison to
IDO, as for example used by Heller et al. (2001) for estimation of hip compression forces,
IFDO only allows changes in muscle force that agree with excitation and activation
dynamics (figure 6). For example in the gluteus medius, the difference in boundaries of
94                                                                                                                                   Chapter 5



muscle force for IFDO and IDO resulted for IDO in unrealistic muscle force patterns and
changes. IFDO resulted in neural inputs that agreed well with EMG measurements.
Although Heller et al. (2001) found a good fit of predicted hip forces with experimental
data, the utilization of IDO and a cost function minimizing sum of muscle forces, the
unreported individual muscle forces are most likely not in agreement with EMG.
Anderson and Pandy (2001) used a forward dynamic musculoskeletal model to optimize
muscle activations by minimizing metabolic energy. Simulated moments were used as an
input in a static model and it was concluded that static and dynamic optimization is
practically equivalent. This statement is in disagreement with the findings in this study. One
explanation is that only one cost function was investigated in the study of Anderson. Cost
functions like the minimization of the sum of muscle force as used by Heller et al. (2001)
resulted in large differences in muscle force between static and dynamic optimization in the
current study. Furthermore the study of Anderson is based on simulated moments instead
of joint torques based on experimental data as in the current study. This underrates the
relevance of muscle dynamics.

                                                                250
            Optimized Gluteus Medius Force and bounderies (N)




                                                                200
                                                                                                           Muscle force IFDO
                                                                                                           Muscle force IDO
                                                                                                           EMG
                                                                150



                                                                100



                                                                50



                                                                 0



                                                                -50
                                                                      10   20   30   40      50      60   70    80     90      100
                                                                                       % of gait cycle



Figure 6 Muscle force optimized according IFDO (black solid) and IDO (black dotted) falling between the
corresponding optimization boundaries (subsequently dark and light grey area). Boundaries for IFDO depend on
the states of the muscle (equation 1 and 2). For IDO muscle forces is bounded between zero and maximal force
(specific muscle tension * PCSA). Muscle forces determined with IDO show unrealistic fast transitions in muscle
force. The solution space for IFDO is much smaller resulting in a different, more realistic muscle force. The solid
light grey line shows the EMG (Winter and Yack, 1987).
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                           95



5.4.4    Cost function

Praagman et al. (2006) experimentally showed that for shoulder muscles the energy related
cost function (equation 4) has a better correspondence with energy consumption than
stress related functions. Besides this energy function, two other frequently used functions
were implemented in the current study. Minimizing the sum of muscle forces (e.g.
(Crowninshield, 1978, Heller et al., 2001)) results in physiologically unrealistic muscle
recruitment showing only activity in the muscle with largest moment arm. The
minimization of squared muscle stresses caused more synergistic activity and a much better
fit with EMG. A drawback of this criterion is that the load was not attributed to smaller
muscles, as small PCSA cause larger unwanted stresses. The energy related cost function
includes muscle mass and fiber length as a measure for the total number of binding cross-
bridges. This makes the use of smaller muscle preferable, besides muscles with large
moment arms and PCSA. It is expected that this corresponds more closely to actual load
sharing. However, this could not be proven in the current study as the surface EMG of
small muscles could not be measured sufficiently accurate.

5.4.5    Concluding remarks

In this study dynamic muscle parameters were incorporated in the TLEM, a
comprehensive musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity based on extensive and
accurate anatomical model parameters. Muscle forces during gait were optimized in a novel
approach using IFDO in combination with an energy related cost function, which resulted
in a stable and fast estimation of muscle forces during gait. Measured EMG agreed
reasonably well with predicted neural inputs. Estimated joint compression forces are in
agreement with in vivo data and can therefore be considered as trustworthy.



5.5      References

An, K. N., Kwak, B. M., Chao, E. Y.,Morrey, B. F., 1984. Determination of muscle and
        joint forces: a new technique to solve the indeterminate problem. Journal of
        Biomechanical Engineering, 106, 364-7.
Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 1999. A Dynamic Optimization Solution for Vertical
        Jumping in Three Dimensions. Computer Methods Biomechanics and Biomedical
        Engineering, 2, 201-231.
Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 2001. Static and dynamic optimization solutions for gait are
        practically equivalent. Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 153-61.
Bergmann, G., Deuretzbacher, G., Heller, M., Graichen, F., Rohlmann, A., Strauss,
        J.,Duda, G. N., 2001. Hip contact forces and gait patterns from routine activities.
        Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 859-71.
96                                                                                 Chapter 5



Bowsher, K. A.,Vaughan, C. L., 1995. Effect of foot-progression angle on hip joint
         moments during gait. Journal of Biomechanics, 28, 759-62.
Brand, R. A., R.D., C., Wittstock, C. E., Pedersen, D. R., Clark, C. R.,Van Krieken, F. M.,
         1982. A model of the lower extremity muscular anatomy. Journal of
         Biomechanical Engineering, 104, 304-310.
Burden, A. M., Trew, M.,Baltzopoulos, V., 2003. Normalisation of gait EMGs: a re-
         examination. Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 13, 519-32.
Cappozzo, A., Leo, T.,Pedotti, A., 1975. A general computing method for the analysis of
         human locomotion. Journal of Biomechanics, 8, 307-20.
Chandler, R. F., Clauser, C. E., Mcconville, J. T., Reynolds, H. M.,Young, J. W., 1975.
         Investigation of inertial properties of the human body. Report DOT HS-801430,
         National Technical Information Service, Springfield Virginia 22151, USA.
Crowninshield, R. D., 1978. Use of optimization techniques to predict muscle forces.
         Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 100, 88-92.
Crowninshield, R. D.,Brand, R. A., 1981. A physiologically based criterion of muscle force
         prediction in locomotion. Journal of Biomechanics, 14, 793-801.
D'lima, D. D., Patil, S., Steklov, N., Slamin, J. E.,Colwell, C. W., Jr., 2006. Tibial forces
         measured in vivo after total knee arthroplasty. Journal of Arthroplasty, 21, 255-62.
Delp, S. L., Loan, J. P., Hoy, M. G., Zajac, F. E., Topp, E. L.,Rosen, J. M., 1990. An
         interactive graphics-based model of the lower extremity to study orthopaedic
         surgical procedures. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 37, 757-67.
Erdemir, A., Mclean, S., Herzog, W.,Van Den Bogert, A. J., 2007. Model-based estimation
         of muscle forces exerted during movements. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol,
         Avon), 22, 131-54.
Fukunaga, T., Roy, R. R., Shellock, F. G., Hodgson, J. A.,Edgerton, V. R., 1996. Specific
         tension of human plantar flexors and dorsiflexors. Journal of Applied Physiology,
         80, 158-65.
Glitsch, U.,Baumann, W., 1997. The three-dimensional determination of internal loads in
         the lower extremity. Journal of Biomechanics, 30, 1123-31.
Hardwick, M. E., Pulido, P. A., D'lima, D. D.,Colwell, C. W., Jr., 2006. e-Knee: the
         electronic knee prosthesis. Orthopaedic Nursing, 25, 326-9.
Heller, M. O., Bergmann, G., Deuretzbacher, G., Durselen, L., Pohl, M., Claes, L., Haas,
         N. P.,Duda, G. N., 2001. Musculo-skeletal loading conditions at the hip during
         walking and stair climbing. Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 883-93.
Hermens, H. J., Freriks, B., Disselhorst-Klug, C.,Rau, G., 2000. Development of
         recommendations for SEMG sensors and sensor placement procedures. Journal
         of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 10, 361-74.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F., Van Der Helm, F. C., Prose, L. P.,Veeger, H. E.,
         2007a. Morphological muscle and joint parameters for musculoskeletal modelling
         of the lower extremity. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol, Avon), 22, 239-47.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F. J. M., Veeger, H. E. J.,Van Der Helm, F. C. T.,
         2007b. Musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity: a comparison of muscle
         moment arms with the literature. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
         [submitted].
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F. J. M., Veeger, H. E. J.,Van Der Helm, F. C. T.,
         2007c. Musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity: comparison of maximal
         isometric moment with the literature. Journal of Biomechanics [submitted].
Koopman, B. (1989) The three-dimensional analysis and prediction of human walking.
         PhD Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede.
Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach                                              97



Koopman, B., Grootenboer, H. J.,De Jongh, H. J., 1995. An inverse dynamics model for
           the analysis, reconstruction and prediction of bipedal walking. Journal of
           Biomechanics, 28, 1369-76.
Li, G., Kaufman, K. R., Chao, E. Y.,Rubash, H. E., 1999. Prediction of antagonistic muscle
           forces using inverse dynamic optimization during flexion/extension of the knee.
           Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 121, 316-22.
Pedersen, D. R., Brand, R. A.,Davy, D. T., 1997. Pelvic muscle and acetabular contact
           forces during gait. Journal of Biomechanics, 30, 959-65.
Perry, J. 1992 Gait Analysis: Normal and Pathological Function, New York, McGraw Hill,
           Inc.
Praagman, M., Chadwick, E. K., Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veeger, H. E., 2006. The
           relationship between two different mechanical cost functions and muscle oxygen
           consumption. Journal of Biomechanics, 39, 758-65.
Thelen, D. G., Anderson, F. C.,Delp, S. L., 2003. Generating dynamic simulations of
           movement using computed muscle control. Journal of Biomechanics, 36, 321-8.
Tsirakos, D., Baltzopoulos, V.,Bartlett, R., 1997. Inverse optimization: functional and
           physiological considerations related to the force-sharing problem. Critical Reviews
           in Biomedical Engineering, 25, 371-407.
Van Der Kooij, H.,Van Der Helm, F. C. (2003) Human gait analysis application of a new
           inverse/forward dynamic optimization (IFDO) method to solve the load sharing
           problem. International symposium on computer simulation in biomechanics.
           Sydney.
Winter, D. A. 1990 Biomechanics and motor control of human movement, Toronto, John
           Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Winter, D. A.,Yack, H. J., 1987. EMG profiles during normal human walking: stride-to-
           stride and inter-subject variability. Electroencephalography and Clinical
           Neurophysiology, 67, 402-11.
Winters, J. M.,Stark, L., 1985. Analysis of fundamental human movement patterns through
           the use of in-depth antagonistic muscle models. IEEE Transactions on
           Biomedical Engineering, 32, 826-39.
Winters, J. M.,Stark, L., 1988. Estimated mechanical properties of synergistic muscles
           involved in movements of a variety of human joints. Journal of Biomechanics, 21,
           1027-41.
Yamaguchi, G. T., Sawa, A. G. U., Moran, D. W., Fessler, M. J.,Winters, J. M., 1990. A
           survey of human musculotendon actuator parameters, in: Winter, J. M. & Woo, S.
           L. Y. (Eds.) Multiple Muscle Systems: Biomechanics and Movement Organisation.
           Springer, Berlin, pp. 717-773.
                                        Chapter 6




Relation between proximal femur deformities and

paralysis of hip abductors in children with

myelomeningocele
Abstract

Children with myelomeningocele frequently develop (sub-)luxated hip joints due to an
increased angle between the neck and the shaft of the femur. More insight in the cause of
this deformation would improve treatment methods such as tendon transfers. It was
hypothesized that this femur deformation is caused by a more vertically oriented hip
compression force in myelomeningocele patients as a result of paralysis of hip abductors.
The goal of this study is to investigate if the force patterns on the hip after paralysis are in
agreement with this hypothesis. Stance and gait were measured with a video system in 4
healthy children and 4 children with lower lumbo-sacral myelomeningocele. The measured
joint angles were used as input in a comprehensive musculoskeletal model of the lower
extremity in order to determine muscle forces, hip compression force and moments on the
physis. Externally measurable segment dimensions, medical history and the measured
EMG signals were used to scale the model to each individual subject. Results for healthy
children were consistent and in agreement with the literature. Myelomeningocele patients
showed a reduced hip abduction moment and in some cases even adduction moments
during gait. It was shown that by including the patient’s pathological deficiencies in the
model, healthy joint torques could not be generated by the muscles in the model. This is an
indication that the patient is forced to walk the deviated Trendelenburg gait due to a lack of
abduction force. Abnormal joint torques resulted in abnormal amplitudes of the
compressive force during gait (up to 524 %BW). In general no significant differences in
direction of the hip compression force were found between the healthy subject and the
patients so the hypothesized cause of the femur neck deformities could not be confirmed.
With more extensive scaling routines based on 3D images of bone geometries, femur
deformations of a patient can be included in the model. It is expected that this will result in
a better scaling of the muscle lines of action such that muscle force and hip compression
can be estimated more accurately. This will possibly give more insight in the validity of the
hypothesis.
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                          101




6.1      Introduction

The most common condition of spina bifida aperta is myelomeningocele in which
meninges and nerves pass through an opening in the spinal canal. Proportional with the
level of the lesion, this deficiency causes severe damage to nerves of the lower extremity,
resulting in a paralysis of the corresponding muscles. Children with a lesion above L3 have
a minimal potential to walk, due to a paralysis of the lower limb muscles. In general with a
lesion below L5 children are able to walk normally (Rueda and Carroll, 1972). Patients with
a lesion level L3-L4 have a so-called Trendelenburg gait in which the trunk is laterally
rotated to counterbalance a paralysis of abductors. Hip adductors and flexors can still
generate active force, allowing the children to walk. In almost all cases these patients
develop an increased valgus angle of the femur neck causing luxations of the hip joint and
consequential walking disabilities (Sharrard, 1964) (figure 1).
Tendon transfers have been used to restore or prevent hip luxations. These procedures aim
to improve walking capability by substituting the action of the paralyzed muscles and
removing the cause of the deformation. Different methods are described in the literature,
for example a lateral iliopsoas tendon transfer to below the trochanter major (Mustard,
1952). Sharrard found that this approach failed to prevent recurrent luxation of the hip
joint in children with complete paralysis of the glutei muscles. He proposed a posterior m.
iliopsoas transfer (Sharrard, 1964). Several studies showed a reduction of the deformities
and an improvement of ambulatory status after this procedure (Sharrard, 1964, Carroll and
Sharrard, 1972, Menelaus, 1969, Stillwell and Menelaus, 1984, Lorente Molto and Martinez
Garrido, 2005, Breed and Healy, 1982, Lee and Carroll, 1985). Others recommended
procedures involving a combination of muscle lengthening or transfer of the tensor fascia
latae, the external oblique, vastus lateralis, rectus femoris and sartorius (Cabaud et al., 1979,
Beaty and Canale, 1990). Despite the multiple operational methods, re-luxation of the hip
after operation still occurs in 4% (Lee and Carroll, 1985) to 40% (Feiwell et al., 1978) of the
myelomeningocele patients. More insight in the relation between abnormal muscle forces
and the femoral deformities in children with myelomeningocele is therefore needed.
A plausible cause of the hip (sub)-luxations is a disturbance in the longitudinal growth of
the femoral neck due to diminished abductor force, resulting in a more vertical orientation
of the femoral neck, as hypothesized in figure 1. Since the center of mass is placed above
the hip joint in myelomeningocele patients, the hip compression force becomes more
vertical. This causes an increased torque on the physis resulting in more compression force
on the medial side of the femur neck. According the growth curve in figure 2 (Frost, 1997)
an increased compression force causes more longitudinal growth on the medial side,
resulting in a coxa valga: an increased valgus angle of the femur neck. If this hypothesis can
be proven tendon transfer procedures can be optimized and more successful results can be
obtained.
102                                                                                                         Chapter 6




                                        Fhip
               A                                                                   Fhip                 B
                   Fmus
                                          Fgrf                       Fmus                        Fgrf

                                        COM                                                      COM




               D                                                                                        C
                          Fhip

                                                                            Fhip
                 Fmus
                                 Fgrf                                                     Fgrf
                                                                       Fmus
                                 COM
                                                                                           COM




Figure 1 At the top, an anterior-posterior radiograph of a healthy subject (left) and a myelomeningocele patient
showing a coxa valga that causes hip (sub-)luxations. Below, 4 schematic drawings of the forces acting on the
femur during single stance phase in the gait cycle, showing the hypothesized cause of deformations in the neck of
the femur. A) Healthy subject: The ground reaction force runs through the center of mass and exerts a torque on
the hip. To maintain moment equilibrium muscles generate a counterbalancing force. The hip compression force
maintains the force equilibrium on the femur. The black dot represents the physis with the corresponding
distributed load. B) Damaged nerves diminish the force in the hip in myelomeningocele patients. Gait pattern is
adapted such that the COM is closer to the hip and the resulting torque can be counterbalanced. The resulting hip
compression force causes a deviated load distribution on the physis. C) According to the growth force response
reported by Frost et al. (1997) increased compression force initiates longitudinal growth, which re-aligns the femur
neck with the load and results in (sub-)luxation of the hip. D) Tendon transfer is aimed to restore the action of
the paralyzed muscles and reduce deformities in order to walking capabilities of the patient.
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                                        103




Figure 2 Growth rate of cartilage in the physis as a function of tension and compression (Frost (1997)). Up to a
certain limit, the growth rate of the physis increases with tension and compression. On the right side of the
compression peak the growth rate reduces with increasing compression force and finally stops.



The compressive forces on the proximal physis of the femur depend on the total force
acting on the hip joint. Several authors calculated this hip compression force during gait
using inverse dynamic musculoskeletal models (Anderson and Pandy, 2001, Pedersen et al.,
1997, Paul, 1976, Crowninshield et al., 1978, Heller et al., 2001). Kinematic data from adult
subjects were used to estimate the muscle forces during a gait cycle. Yet, none of these
studies reported the compressive hip force in healthy children and children with
myelomeningocele. As a result, the compressive forces on the proximal physis of the femur
in these children are unknown. So there is no quantitative evidence to prove the
hypothesized relation between a lack of abduction force and a deformation of the femur
neck. In the current study, a recently developed musculoskeletal model of the lower
extremity (Klein Horsman et al., 2007b) was used to estimate muscle forces and the
resulting hip compression force and moments with respect to the physis in healthy children
and children with myelomeningocele during two activities in daily living; walking and
stance.
Proving the hypothesis as shown in figure 1 requires many steps. The aim of this study is to
gain insight in the first important questions:
     1) Is the hip abduction torque diminished in patients with myelomeningocele in
          comparison to healthy children?
     2) If so, is the pathological gait the result of the hip paralysis or in other words can a
          scaled model which includes the reduced force of the patient generate healthy
          joint torques?
     3) Are the amplitude and direction of hip compression forces consistent among
          healthy subjects? Are these forces in agreement with in vivo measurements?
     4) Is the direction and amplitude of the hip compression forces more vertically in
          patients during pathological gait and stance?
     5) If so, what is the moment with respect to the physis? What is the distributed load
          in the physis?
104                                                                                                 Chapter 6




6.2           Methods

6.2.1         Subjects

The gait and posture of four children with lower lumbo-sacral myelomeningocele (age 4-10
years) were investigated. All children were community ambulators (Hoffer et al., 1973)
walking with orthopedic shoes. The characteristics of these children, including the Medical
Research Council (MRC) grades (Medical Research Council, 1943), are listed in table 1.
Four children (age 8-11 years) with no known gait related pathologies were studied for
comparison (table 2).


Subject                         1                    2             3                  4
Gender                          Male                 Male          Male               Male
Age (years)                     4                    6             7                  10
Weight (kg)                     17.0                 26.0          22.0               41.5
Height (cm)                     104                  122           120                147
MRC grades of the right and
left leg
   Gluteus maximus              4–4                  0–0           *                  2–3
   Gluteus medius               2–2                  0–0           *                  3–3
   Medial hamstrings            5–5                  5–5           *                  5–5
   Lateral hamstrings           5–5                  5–5           *                  5–5
   Tibialis anterior            5–5                  5–0           *                  5–5
   Tibialis posterior           1–1                  4–0           *                  5–5
   Triceps surae                0–0                  0–0           *                  2–3
  Peronei                       1–1                  0–0           *                  *
Contractures                    50% lateralization   No signs      Correction right   No signs
                                of r. femur, r.                    valgus foot
                                equinovarus foot

Walking speed (ms-1)            0.84 ± 0.10          0.80 ± 0.07   0.84 ± 0.07        1.34 ± 0.15

Table 1 Characteristics of the myelomeningocele (MMC) subjects.
* MRC grade was not available.
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                              105




                               1                       2             3             4
Gender                         Male                    Male          Male          Male
Age (years)                    8                       8             10            11
Weight (kg)                    36.0                    34.0          34.5          48.0
Height (cm)                    147                     139           150           164
Walking speed (ms-1)           1.02 ± 0.04             1.15 ± 0.09   1.38 ± 0.03   1.43 ± 0.07

Table 2 Characteristics of the healthy (H) subjects.


The local ethics committee of Roessingh Rehabilitation Clinic approved this research
project and informed consent from the parents was obtained before each measurement.



6.2.2         Measurement of kinematics

All subjects performed 2 trials standing with their right leg on a force platform.
Subsequently each subject walked at least ten times over a walkway. The corresponding 3D
kinematics were recorded using six infrared cameras (VICON, Oxford Metrics, Oxford,
U.K., 100 Hz) and two AMTI force platforms (Watertown, MA, 1000 Hz). Surface EMG
of the following right leg muscles were measured: m. gluteus maximus, m. gluteus medius,
m. rectus femoris, m. vastus lateralis, m. biceps femoris, m. semitendinosus, m.
gastrocnemius and m. tibialis anterior. A reference electrode was placed around the wrist.
The surface electrodes were placed in accordance with the Seniam recommendations
(Hermens et al., 2000). A 16-channel EMG system (K-lab, Kinesiologic laboratory system,
Amsterdam, 1000 Hz) recorded the EMG signals. The raw EMG signals were filtered with
a high pass filter (3rd order, zero-phase lag, cut-off, Butterworth, 20 Hz), then rectified, low
pass filtered (2nd order, zero-phase lag, cut-off, Butterworth, 25 Hz) and interpolated.
The joint angles were determined using an inverse rigid-body dynamic model (Koopman et
al., 1995). Kinematic data and ground reaction forces were low pass filtered (2nd order,
zero-phase lag, cut-off, Butterworth, 5 Hz).



6.2.3         Twente Lower Extremity Model

The Twente Lower Extremity Model (TLEM), a recently developed musculoskeletal model
of the lower extremity was used to estimate hip compression force of the measured
movements. This model is based on an extensive anatomical dataset of a right lower
extremity (Klein Horsman et al., 2007a). The model consists of 12 body segments: HAT
(head, arms and trunk), pelvis and the left and right femur, patella, tibia, talus and foot.
There are 21 degrees of freedom (DOF) described in the model: the L5S1 joint and the left
106                                                                               Chapter 6



and right hip with 3 DOF and the left and right knee, talocrural and subtalar joint with 1
DOF. To describe the mechanical effect of the 76 lower limb muscles in both lower
extremities, 264 Hill type muscle elements are defined. A muscle element is determined by
the position of the origin and insertion. Muscle parameters such as muscle mass, pennation
angle, physical cross-sectional area (PCSA), tendon length and optimal fiber length, are
assigned to each muscle. A more detailed description of the TLEM is given in a previous
study (Klein Horsman et al., 2007b). The model has been validated by comparing muscle
moment arms, maximal isometric moments, joint forces and neural inputs with data in
literature (Klein Horsman et al., 2007b, Klein Horsman et al., 2007c, Klein Horsman et al.,
2007d).



6.2.4    Scaling

The TLEM was scaled to each individual subject. The segments were scaled such that the
bony landmarks as defined in the musculoskeletal model fit with the bony landmarks as
measured on the subject in an upright pose. As a consequence of segment scaling the
muscle lengths changed. The ratios between the scaled and original muscle lengths were
used to scale the tendon lengths and the muscle optimal fiber lengths. The muscle mass
was scaled linearly with the mass ratio and the PCSA with the mass and height ratio.
In the myelomeningocele subjects the innervations of some muscles was limited. The
lesion level and MRC grades reported in the medical history and the measured EMG
signals were used to determine the innervation level of these muscles. The innervation
levels were used to linearly diminish the maximal force these muscles could generate in the
musculoskeletal model.



6.2.5    Model simulations

This study consisted of 5 different model simulations:
     Simulation of healthy gait kinematics with the TLEM scaled to the corresponding
         healthy subjects;
     Simulation of pathological gait kinematics with the TLEM scaled to the
         corresponding myelomeningocele patients;
     Simulation of healthy gait kinematics with the TLEM scaled to myelomeningocele
         patients;
     Simulation of healthy stance in with the TLEM scaled to corresponding healthy
         subjects;
     Simulation of pathological stance with the TLEM scaled to corresponding
         myelomeningocele patients.
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                        107



6.2.6    Hip compressive force and physeal moment

An inverse-forward dynamic optimization (IFDO) method was used to estimate muscle
forces (Van Der Kooij, 2003, Klein Horsman et al., 2007d). This inverse optimization
method uses a forward muscle model to account for muscle dynamics. The distribution of
the muscle forces was determined by an optimization of an energy related cost function
(Praagman et al., 2006). Hip compression force was calculated by summing all forces on
the femur: the optimized muscle forces, the external forces and inertial and gravitational
forces. The physeal moments were defined as the cross product of the hip compression
force vector and a moment arm vector from the hip to a fixed point on the physis. The
location of the physis is not included in the anatomical dataset of Klein Horsman et al.
(2007a) and therefore assumed in the middle of the trochanter major and the rotation
center of the hip joint.



6.3      Results

A representative gait and stance trial of each subject was chosen for data presentation.

6.3.1    Joint angles

The joint angles of the healthy (H) subjects are in line with the ranges found in literature
(e.g.(van der Linden ML et al., 2002, Gutierrez et al., 2003, Winter, 1991)). The joint angles
of the myelomeningocele (MMC) subjects varied (figure 3). These variations are probably
caused by small differences in muscle paresis around the ankle and hip joint (Gutierrez et
al., 2005). The joint angles of MMC subject 3 and 4 showed relatively small deviations from
normal. Mainly sagittal plane differences were observed. The gait pattern of MMC subject 1
and 2 were markedly different. They showed a hip abduction position during stance,
whereas it was adduction in healthy subjects. The knee joint of MMC subject 1 was also
more flexed during stance and the ankle was persistent slightly dorsal flexed (figure 3).
108                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 6




                                                                     Hip Flexion−Extension angle                                                                                    Hip Endo−Exorotation angle
                                                       40                                                                                                           20
  Extension (←) or Flexion (→) angle [degrees]




                                                                                                                    Exo (←) or Endorotation (→) angle [degrees]
                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                     5

                                                       10                                                                                                            0

                                                        0                                                                                                           −5

                                                                                                                                                                   −10
                                                      −10
                                                                                                                                                                   −15
                                                      −20                                                                                                          −20

                                                      −30                                                                                                          −25
                                                         0     20           40          60             80   100                                                       0       20          40          60          80     100
                                                                            % of gait cycle                                                                                               % of gait cycle

                                                                        Hip Ab−Adduction angle                                                                                     Knee Flexion−Extension angle
                                                       10                                                                                                           30
  Abduction (←) or Adduction (→) angle [degrees]




                                                                                                                    Flexion (←) or Extension (→) angle [degrees]
                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                   −10

                                                       −5                                                                                                          −20

                                                                                                                                                                   −30
                                                      −10
                                                                                                                                                                   −40

                                                                                                                                                                   −50
                                                      −15
                                                                                                                                                                   −60

                                                      −20                                                                                                          −70
                                                         0     20           40          60             80   100                                                       0       20          40          60          80     100
                                                                            % of gait cycle                                                                                               % of gait cycle

                                                                    Ankle Plantar−Dorsiflexion angle
                                                       20
  Plantar (←) or Dorsiflexion ( → ) angle [degrees]




                                                       15                                                                                                                 MMC subject 1
                                                       10                                                                                                                 MMC subject 2
                                                        5                                                                                                                 MMC subject 3
                                                        0                                                                                                                 MMC subject 4
                                                       −5

                                                      −10

                                                      −15                                                         Figure 3 Measured hip, knee and ankle joint angles of
                                                      −20                                                         the MMC subjects together with the healthy subject
                                                      −25                                                         range during normal walking indicated with the grey
                                                      −30
                                                         0     20           40          60             80   100   area.
                                                                            % of gait cycle




6.3.2                                                        Joint moments

The joint moments of the healthy subjects in the sagittal and frontal plane are comparable
with the joint moments described in the literature (Gutierrez et al., 2005, van der Linden
ML et al, 2002, Winter, 1991). However the healthy subjects in this study had an increased
hip rotation moment. The hip moments of the MMC subjects varied and differed from the
healthy subjects. In the sagittal plane, MMC subjects 3 and 4 delivered more hip extension
during early stance and the cross-over to a flexion moment was delayed in MMC subjects 1,
2 and 3. In the frontal plane even larger deviations were observed. MMC subject 1 had a
total lack of hip abduction moment and showed instead a hip adduction moment during
stance. The hip abduction moment of the other MMC subjects was less than normal. In the
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                                                                                                                                                  109



transversal plane, the profile of the hip rotation moment was altered in MMC subjects 1
and 2. A hip external rotation moment was observed during the first 25% of the gait cycle,
whereas healthy subjects showed an internal rotation moment (figure 4).
The knee moments of the MMC subjects also varied from normal. During early stance the
knee extension moment of MMC subjects 2 and 4 was larger than that of the healthy
subjects. The average knee extension moment of MMC subject 4 was even more than twice
as large. During late stance MMC subjects 2, 3 and 4 showed less knee flexion moment.
MMC subject 4 maintained knee extension throughout the whole stance phase, so no
flexion moment was generated during late stance (figure 4). The ankle moment of the
MMC subjects showed a smaller peak plantar flexion moment than in the healthy subjects.


                                                      Hip Flexion−Extension moment                                                                                        Hip Endo−Exorotation moment
                                            8                                                                                                              5
  Flexion (←) or Extension (→) moment




                                            6                                                                       Internal (←) or External (→) moment    4


                                            4                                                                                                              3


                                            2                                                                                                              2


                                            0                                                                                                              1


                                           −2                                                                                                              0


                                           −4                                                                                                             −1


                                           −6                                                                                                             −2
                                             0   20          40          60          80   100                                                               0        20          40          60         80     100
                                                             % of gait cycle                                                                                                     % of gait cycle

                                                       Hip Ab−Adduction moment                                                                                            Knee Flexion−Extension moment
                                            5                                                                                                              4
  Adduction (←) or Abduction (→) moment




                                            4                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                 Extension (←) or Flexion (→) moment




                                            3                                                                                                              0

                                            2                                                                                                             −2

                                            1                                                                                                             −4

                                            0                                                                                                             −6

                                           −1                                                                                                             −8

                                           −2                                                                                                    −10

                                           −3                                                                                                    −12
                                             0   20          40          60          80   100                                                       0                20           40          60          80   100
                                                             % of gait cycle                                                                                                      % of gait cycle
                                                  Ankle Plantar−Dorsiflexion moment
                                           14

                                                                                                                                                                MMC subject 1
  Dorsi (←) or Plantarflexion (→) moment




                                           12

                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                MMC subject 2
                                                                                                                                                                MMC subject 3
                                            8                                                                                                                   MMC subject 4
                                            6
                                                                                                Figure 4 Calculated hip, knee and ankle joint moments
                                            4
                                                                                                of the MMC subjects together with the healthy subject
                                            2
                                                                                                range during normal walking indicated with the grey
                                            0                                                   area. The joint moments were normalized to subject
                                           −2                                                   length and weight.
                                             0   20          40          60          80   100
                                                             % of gait cycle
110                                                                                                 Chapter 6



6.3.3      Amplitude of the hip compressive force

The healthy children showed a hip compressive force amplitude (scaled to body weight)
that is in agreement with in vivo measured hip compressive forces of elderly patients with a
hip implant (Bergmann et al., 2001) (figure 5). Healthy subject 3 showed increased hip joint
moments during stance. Therefore the hip compressive force of this subject was larger
compared to the other subjects.
As for the joint moments, the variations between the hip compressive force of the MMC
and healthy subjects are considerable (figure 5). The hip compressive force of these
subjects showed less clearly the characteristically two-peak form with peak values up to 524
%BW. MMC subject 1 showed large deviating hip moments, especially during mid and late
stance. This made determination of the hip compressive force impossible since the muscle
force could not be generated by the TLEM. During early stance the hip compressive force
could be determined. The first peak in the hip compressive force, just after heel strike, had
an amplitude of 338 %BW.




Figure 5 On the left calculated hip compressive force of the healthy subjects and in vivo measured hip
compressive forces (Bergmann et al., 2001) during normal walking. The in vivo data were obtained with an
average walking speed of 1.09 ms-1. All forces were normalized to subject weight. On the right calculated hip
compressive force of the MMC subjects during normal walking. The forces were normalized to subject weight.


6.3.4      Direction of the hip compressive force

In the healthy subjects the average direction of the hip compressive force was consistent
(table 3). The inclinations angles were slightly smaller compared to in vivo measurements
(Bergmann et al., 2001). MMC subject 3 showed similar inclination angles as the healthy
subjects, but the inclination angles of MMC subjects 2 and 4 differed (table 3). As an
example, the range and the mean inclination angles of the average healthy subject and
MMC subject 4 are displayed in figure 6.
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                                        111




Figure 6 The directions of the hip compressive force for the average healthy subject and MMC subject 4.

Subject
                            Angle in the frontal plane   Angle in the sagittal plane   Angle in the transverse
                            (Degrees)                    (Degrees)                     plane (Degrees)

Healthy subject 1           16.6 ± 8.7                   6.2 ± 11.3                    14.2 ± 28.5

Healthy subject 2           16.6 ± 10.2                  6.8 ± 10.3                    17.1 ± 27.5

Healthy subject 3           19.1 ± 8.4                   7.8 ± 7.7                     17.5 ± 20.1

Healthy subject 4           16.9 ± 8.2                   7.7 ± 7.3                     22.2 ± 21.5



MMC subject 1*              -                            -                             -

MMC subject 2               14.9 ± 10.5                  10.6 ± 10.1                   37.6 ± 32.7

MMC subject 3               16.9 ± 9.6                   6.1 ± 7.2                     17.2 ± 21.9

MMC subject 4               21.0 ± 8.9                   11.6 ± 7.8                    27.3 ± 14.4


Table 3 Mean and standard deviation of the normalized hip compressive force inclination angles during normal
walking. * The dynamic optimization problem could not be solved for the whole gait cycle.




6.3.5       Physeal moments

The healthy subjects, except subject 3, showed consistent physeal moments. As for the
joint moments and the hip compressive force, the physeal moments of healthy subject 3
were slightly larger. The physeal moments of the MMC subjects were on average slightly
larger compared to the healthy subjects (table 4).
112                                                                                          Chapter 6




                           Moment around               Moment around         Moment around
Subject
                           local x-axis                local y-axis          local z-axis

Healthy subject 1          2.11 ± 0.76                 0.05 ± 0.11           0.12 ± 0.29
Healthy subject 2          2.14 ± 0.71                 0.05 ± 0.10           0.14 ± 0.28

Healthy subject 3          3.20 ± 1.34                 0.14 ± 0.14           0.36 ± 0.39

Healthy subject 4          2.50 ± 0.88                 0.09 ± 0.08           0.27 ± 0.27



MMC subject 1*             -                           -                     -

MMC subject 2              2.46 ± 1.23                 0.13 ± 0.11           0.41 ± 0.33

MMC subject 3              3.37 ± 1.36                 0.08 ± 0.09           0.25 ± 0.28

MMC subject 4              2.24 ± 1.02                 0.12 ± 0.09           0.32 ± 0.24



Table 4 Mean and standard deviation of the physeal moments around a fixed
point during normal walking. The moments are presented in the coordinate
frame of the femur (Wu et al., 2002) and were normalized to subject length
and weight.
* The dynamic optimization problem could not be solved for the whole gait
cycle.




6.3.6       Stance: Hip compressive force and physeal moment

During stance the amplitude of the hip compressive force was for the healthy as well as the
MMC subjects nearly constant (figure 7). The amplitude of the healthy subjects showed
only small variations. Their average amplitude was 93.5 %BW. The MMC subjects showed
large variation in hip compressive force amplitude. The amplitude of MMC subject 3 was
rather small because this subject placed most of his weight on his left foot. The hip
compressive force of MMC subject 1 could not be determined. As for the gait trial, the
TLEM was not able to solve the dynamic optimization problem.
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                                          113




Figure 7 Left, calculated hip compressive force of the healthy subjects during stance. The forces were
normalized to subject weight. Right, calculated hip compressive force of the MMC subjects during stance. The
forces were normalized to subject weight.


The direction of the hip compressive force was nearly constant during stance. However the
average direction largely varied between the subjects, especially in the sagittal and frontal
plane (table 5). In the frontal plane, the inclination angles were generally smaller compared
to normal walking.


                            Angle in the frontal plane   Angle in the sagittal plane   Angle in the transversal
Subject
                            (Degrees)                    (Degrees)                     plane (Degrees)


Healthy subject 1           13.9 ± 1.3                   2.5 ± 3.1                     9.2 ± 12.9

Healthy subject 2           10.1 ± 1.0                   5.1 ± 3.7                     25.0 ± 18.1

Healthy subject 3           16.3 ± 0.7                   -0.4 ± 0.4                    -1.5 ± 1.3

Healthy subject 4           12.6 ± 1.5                   9.2 ± 1.1                     35.8 ± 4.9



MMC subject 1*              -                            -                             -

MMC subject 2               10.9 ± 1.4                   4.8 ± 1.1                     24.2 ± 7.3

MMC subject 3               18.5 ± 1.8                   14.9 ± 1.8                    38.5 ± 2.8

MMC subject 4               11.6 ± 0.7                   4.0 ± 0.5                     18.8 ± 2.5


Table 5 Mean and standard deviation of the inclination angle during stance.
* The dynamic optimization problem could not be solved.




In consistency with the inclination angles of the hip compressive force, the physeal
moments of the healthy as well as the MMC subjects varied. The physeal moments of all
MMC subjects are within the healthy subject range (table 6).
114                                                                                         Chapter 6




                         Moment around local x-    Moment around local y-    Moment around local z-
Subject
                         axis                      axis                      axis

Healthy subject 1        1.05 ± 0.02               0.01 ± 0.00               0.03 ± 0.02

Healthy subject 2        0.86 ± 0.06               0.01 ± 0.01               0.08 ± 0.06

Healthy subject 3        1.43 ± 0.06               0.00 ± 0.00               0.01 ± 0.01

Healthy subject 4        1.03 ± 0.05               0.04 ± 0.00               0.15 ± 0.02



MMC subject 1*           -                         -                         -

MMC subject 2            1.21 ± 0.08               0.02 ± 0.00               0.10 ± 0.01

MMC subject 3            0.65 ± 0.02               0.06 ± 0.01               0.15 ± 0.01

MMC subject 4            0.98 ± 0.05               0.01 ± 0.00               0.06 ± 0.01


Table 6 Mean and standard deviation of the physeal moments around a fixed point during stance. The
moments are presented in the coordinate frame of the femur and were normalized to subject length and
weight.
* The dynamic optimization problem could not be solved.




6.4         Discussion

In the current study a relation between an increased valgus angle of the neck of the femur
and a paralysis of hip abductors was hypothesized. A better insight in the cause of these hip
deformations observed in MMC patients would improve treatment methods of gait
disorders and increase the resulting ambulatory status of the patient. As an onset towards a
better insight, 5 research questions were investigated regarding this hypothesis. The insights
are discussed below.



6.4.1       Study outcome

The gait pattern and joint moments, except the rotation moment, of the healthy subjects
are in line with literature data (Winter, 1991, van der Linden ML et al., 2002, Gutierrez et
al., 2003, Gutierrez et al., 2005) (figure 3 & 4). All the anatomical model parameters
measured on an adult specimen (Klein Horsman et al., 2007a) were scaled to dimensions of
the segments of an individual subject. For the healthy subjects, the muscles in the scaled
model were capable to counterbalance the measured joint torques. The resulting
compression forces were consistent among the subjects. Furthermore joint compression
force as a percentage of body weight, agreed reasonably well with in vivo measured joint
forces in adults with an instrumented prosthesis (Bergmann et al., 2001). Based on these
three results the TLEM and its scaling to a healthy subject are considered sufficiently
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                       115



accurate for the purpose of this study. It should be noted that neither measured nor
calculated hip compressive force in healthy children has been reported elsewhere in the
literature.
The MMC subjects walked with reduced hip abduction moment which is agreement with
the hypothesis in figure 1, yet the variation among patients is large. Subject 1 even showed
an adduction torque during stance phase.
The MMC subjects have a partly denervated gluteus medius and gluteus maximus. The
reduction of force was accounted for by scaling the maximal force of the muscle.
Simulations showed that with the muscle paralysis a normal gait pattern was impossible due
to a lack of hip abduction power. These results strengthen the hypothesis in figure 1 that
the subject is forced to walk with Trendelenburg gait to compensate for a reduced
abduction strength.
The altered joint moments resulted in an altered hip compressive force (figure 5). The
amplitude of this force showed peak forces up to 524 %BW, which is much larger than
normal. Yet since the range of joint moments shows relatively large variation between
patients, the compression vary as well, both in amplitude and direction. The direction of
the hip compressive force as well as the physeal moments did not significantly differ from
normal.
Besides walking, stance was investigated as another daily activity. During stance the
contribution of the gravitational force to the hip compressive force is relatively large. Most
subjects divided the gravitational force equally over their right and left foot. However
MMC subjects 1 and 3 placed more weight on their left foot, most likely because of their
right foot malformations (table 1). In these subjects the contribution of the gravitational
force to the hip compressive force was smaller, which resulted in a smaller hip compressive
force in MMC subject 3. The hip compressive force of the other MMC subjects as well as
the physeal moments did not show significant differences from normal.
The simulation results of stance and gait showed no significant differences in physeal
moments so the hypothesized cause of the femur neck deformities could not (yet) be
confirmed leaving the last two research questions unanswered.



6.4.2    Limitations

In the current study a musculoskeletal model was used to gain more insight in possible
causes of femur deformities observed in MMC patients. This is the first paper in which
comprehensive musculoskeletal models were used to study this clinical issue The
limitations met in this study provide important guidelines for future improvements of the
TLEM in order to gain more insight in the validity of the hypothesis.
First, we assumed that a sufficiently accurate representation of a subject was obtained by a
proportional scaling of the geometry of the musculoskeletal model using externally
measured positions of bony landmarks. Subject specific variations in femoral geometry
116                                                                                 Chapter 6



were not included in the scaling of the musculoskeletal model. The scaling seemed
sufficient for all healthy subjects as discussed in the previous paragraph. However, due to
deformities in the neck of the femur the chances that deviations between the model and
the patient negatively affect the model outcome increase. The deformations in the neck of
the femur were the largest in MMC patient 1. A radiograph of this subject showed an
increased valgus angle and a right hip luxation of approximately 35% (see figure 1). In this
patient joint torques deviated most from the normal torques. In mid-late stance the
muscles are required to generate hip adduction, flexion and internal rotation torques, which
is opposite from normal. To counterbalance these moments with the muscles in the scaled
model seemed not possible. Only by increasing the muscle specific tension or decreasing
the joint moments it was possible to optimize the muscle forces. A possible explanation for
the lack of torque is a deviation in the muscle moment arms in the model and the patient
due to insufficient scaling of the bone geometry. A possible solution will be given in the
next paragraph.
Second, we assumed that the contribution of passive forces to the joint moments was
negligible during walking and stance. This assumption seems appropriate for healthy
subjects since joint angles are small during gait. Yet in the MMC patients passive forces
may increase due to an abnormal gait pattern and (sub-)luxations of the hip. The lack of
contributions of passive structures could be another explanation for the inability to solve
the dynamic optimization problem for MMC subject 1. Including these forces in the load
sharing requires a very accurate representation of the joint kinematics and lines of action of
the ligament since small errors in ligament length cause large errors in force. A successful
implementation depends on accurate scaling to a specific subject. This is further
illuminated in the next paragraph.
The third assumption is the scaling of the maximal force the m. gluteus medius and m.
gluteus medius in the MMC subjects. This assumption was made based on the lesion level
and MRC grades reported in the medical history as well as the recorded EMG signals. The
influence of this assumption on the hip compressive force was limited. For example, in
MMC subject 2 a 10 % decrease of the maximal m. gluteus medius and m. gluteus maximus
force resulted in a 13 %BW increase of the hip compressive force during normal walking.
The direction of this force changed -0.3° in the frontal plane, 0.7° in the sagittal plane and
1.2° in the transversal plane. Since the actual muscle force in a patient could not be
measured the accuracy of this assumption could not be further quantified.



6.4.3    Future work

Musculoskeletal models have a great potential to serve in the treatment of orthopedic
problems (Erdemir et al., 2006). The TLEM is unique among other models since the
anatomical parameters were based on one consistent dataset (Klein Horsman et al., 2007a).
This is an important step forward since errors due to merging of datasets are omitted. In
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                       117



this study the model is applied in a clinical study and therefore scaled to the properties of
the patient. This step introduces an uncertainty as many parameters cannot be measured
from the outside. More accurate scaling could be obtained if multiple consistent anatomical
datasets are available as the dataset of Klein Horsman et al. (2007a). This allows the
formulation of extensive regression equations which relates externally measurable
properties with internal properties that cannot be collected on the subject directly. For the
myelomeningocele patients it is expected that a good match with the 3D bone geometries
will improve the accuracy of moment arm of the muscle lines, as been shown in a previous
cadaver study (Kaptein and van der Helm, 2004).
Surgical interventions such as tendon transfers have been utilized to reduce hip luxation in
children with lower lumbo-sacral myelomeningocele. In this study an inverse dynamic
approach was used to simulate walking and stance. Under the assumptions that joint angles
are unchanged, the effect of a tendon transfer on the hip load can be implemented. The
applications of the TLEM can be extended by implementing forward dynamic simulations.
The advantage of this approach is that the effect of the tendon transfer on the gait pattern
could be determined and evaluated pre-operatively. This can be used in order to optimize
treatment methods.



6.5      References

Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 2001. Static and dynamic optimization solutions for gait are
          practically equivalent. J Biomech, 34, 153-61.
Beaty, J. H.,Canale, S. T., 1990. Orthopaedic aspects of myelomeningocele. J Bone Joint
          Surg Am, 72, 626-30.
Bergmann, G., Deuretzbacher, G., Heller, M., Graichen, F., Rohlmann, A., Strauss,
          J.,Duda, G. N., 2001. Hip contact forces and gait patterns from routine activities.
          J Biomech, 34, 859-71.
Breed, A. L.,Healy, P. M., 1982. The midlumbar myelomeningocele hip: mechanism of
          dislocation and treatment. J Pediatr Orthop, 2, 15-24.
Cabaud, H. E., Westin, G. W.,Connelly, S., 1979. Tendon transfers in the paralytic hip. J
          Bone Joint Surg Am, 61, 1035-41.
Carroll, N. C.,Sharrard, W. J., 1972. Long-term follow-up of posterior iliopsoas
          transplantation for paralytic dislocation of the hip. J Bone Joint Surg Am, 54, 551-
          60.
Crowninshield, R. D., Johnston, R. C., Andrews, J. G.,Brand, R. A., 1978. A biomechanical
          investigation of the human hip. J Biomech, 11, 75-85.
Erdemir, A., Mclean, S., Herzog, W.,Van Den Bogert, A. J., 2006. Model-based estimation
          of muscle forces exerted during movements. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol,
          Avon).
Feiwell, E., Sakai, D.,Blatt, T., 1978. The effect of hip reduction on function in patients
          with myelomeningocele. Potential gains and hazards of surgical treatment. J Bone
          Joint Surg Am, 60, 169-73.
118                                                                                Chapter 6



Frost, H. M., 1997. Biomechanical control of knee alignment: some insights from a new
          paradigm. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, 335-42.
Gutierrez, E. M., Bartonek, A., Haglund-Akerlind, Y.,Saraste, H., 2003. Characteristic gait
          kinematics in persons with lumbosacral myelomeningocele. Gait Posture, 18, 170-
          7.
Gutierrez, E. M., Bartonek, A., Haglund-Akerlind, Y.,Saraste, H., 2005. Kinetics of
          compensatory gait in persons with myelomeningocele. Gait Posture, 21, 12-23.
Heller, M. O., Bergmann, G., Deuretzbacher, G., Durselen, L., Pohl, M., Claes, L., Haas,
          N. P.,Duda, G. N., 2001. Musculo-skeletal loading conditions at the hip during
          walking and stair climbing. J Biomech, 34, 883-93.
Hermens, H. J., Freriks, B., Disselhorst-Klug, C.,Rau, G., 2000. Development of
          recommendations for SEMG sensors and sensor placement procedures. J
          Electromyogr Kinesiol, 10, 361-74.
Hoffer, M. M., Feiwell, E., Perry, R., Perry, J.,Bonnett, C., 1973. Functional ambulation in
          patients with myelomeningocele. J Bone Joint Surg Am, 55, 137-48.
Kaptein, B. L.,Van Der Helm, F. C., 2004. Estimating muscle attachment contours by
          transforming geometrical bone models. Journal of Biomechanics, 37, 263-73.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F., Van Der Helm, F. C., Prose, L. P.,Veeger, H. E.,
          2007a. Morphological muscle and joint parameters for musculoskeletal modelling
          of the lower extremity. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol, Avon), 22, 239-47.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F. J. M., Veeger, H. E. J.,Van Der Helm, F. C. T.,
          2007b. Musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity: a comparison of muscle
          moment arms with the literature. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
          [submitted].
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F. J. M., Veeger, H. E. J.,Van Der Helm, F. C. T.,
          2007c. Musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity: comparison of maximal
          isometric moment with the literature. Journal of Biomechanics [submitted].
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F. J. M., Veeger, H. E. J.,Van Der Helm, F. C. T.,
          2007d. Validation of a dynamic load sharing approach for the lower extremity.
          Journal of Biomechanics [submitted].
Koopman, B., Grootenboer, H. J.,De Jongh, H. J., 1995. An inverse dynamics model for
          the analysis, reconstruction and prediction of bipedal walking. J Biomech, 28,
          1369-76.
Lee, E. H.,Carroll, N. C., 1985. Hip stability and ambulatory status in myelomeningocele. J
          Pediatr Orthop, 5, 522-7.
Lorente Molto, F. J.,Martinez Garrido, I., 2005. Retrospective review of L3
          myelomeningocele in three age groups: should posterolateral iliopsoas transfer
          still be indicated to stabilize the hip? J Pediatr Orthop B, 14, 177-84.
Medical Research Council, 1943. Aids to the investigation of peripheral nerve injuries.
Menelaus, M. B., 1969. Dislocation and deformity of the hip in children with spina bifida
          cystica. J Bone Joint Surg Br, 51, 238-51.
Mustard, W. T., 1952. Iliopsoas transfer for weakness of the hip abductors: A preliminary
          report. J Bone Joint Surg Am, 34, 647-650.
Paul, J. P., 1976. Force actions transmitted by joints in the human body. Proc R Soc Lond
          B Biol Sci, 192, 163-72.
Pedersen, D. R., Brand, R. A.,Davy, D. T., 1997. Pelvic muscle and acetabular contact
          forces during gait. J Biomech, 30, 959-65.
Hip compression forces in Myelomeningocele patients                                        119



Praagman, M., Chadwick, E. K., Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veeger, H. E., 2006. The
           relationship between two different mechanical cost functions and muscle oxygen
           consumption. J Biomech, 39, 758-65.
Rueda, J.,Carroll, N. C., 1972. Hip instability in patients with myelomeningocele. Journal of
           Bone and Joint Surgery. British Volume, 54, 422-31.
Sharrard, W. J., 1964. Posterior Iliopsoas Transplantation In The Treatment Of Paralytic
           Dislocation Of The Hip. J Bone Joint Surg Br, 46, 426-44.
Stillwell, A.,Menelaus, M. B., 1984. Walking ability after transplantation of the iliopsoas. A
           long-term follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg Br, 66, 656-9.
Van Der Kooij, H., Van Der Helm, F.C., 2003. Human gait analysis application of a new
           inverse/forward dynamic optimization (IFDO) method to solve the load sharing
           problem. International symposium on computer simulation in biomechanics.
Van Der Linden Ml, Kerr Am, Hazlewood Me, Hillman Sj,Robb Je, 2002. Kinematic and
           kinetic gait characteristics of normal children walking at a range of clinically
           relevant speeds. Journal of Pediatric Orthopaedics, 22, 800-806.
Winter, D. A., 1991. The biomechanics and motor control of human gait: Normal, elderly
           and pathological. University of Waterloo Press, Waterloo, Ont.
Wu, G., Siegler, S., Allard, P., Kirtley, C., Leardini, A., Rosenbaum, D., Whittle, M., D'lima,
           D. D., Cristofolini, L., Witte, H., Schmid, O.,Stokes, I., 2002. ISB
           recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate system of various joints for
           the reporting of human joint motion--part I: ankle, hip, and spine. International
           Society of Biomechanics. Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 543-8.
                     Chapter 7




General discussion
General Discussion                                                                       123




7.1      Introduction

In chapter 1 the objective of this thesis was defined as follows:

The development and validation of a comprehensive inverse-forward dynamic
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity based on an accurate and consistent
anatomical dataset aiming to evaluate if-then scenarios with respect to the treatment of gait
disorders.

This goal was met in 4 steps: the collection of anatomical parameters, the development of
the model, the validation of important model outputs and finally the application of the
model in a clinical case study.
Since the quality of existing datasets was not satisfactory, this project started with an
extensive cadaveric dissection study. This resulted in a new parameter set that fulfilled the
requirement as described in the objective.
Fully based on this dataset, the Twente Lower Extremity Model (TLEM) has been
developed (Chapter 3). The consistency and comprehensiveness of this 21 DOF
musculoskeletal model is unique among other models. The 264 Hill-type muscle elements
in the TLEM together with wrapping surfaces, via points and parameters such as optimal
fiber length, led to an appropriate representation of muscle line of action, which is an
important qualification for accurate optimization of muscle force.
As a next step the validity of the geometry and force generating capacity of the TLEM was
evaluated. Unfortunately, it was unfeasible to measure these properties directly on the
specimen, hampering a direct validation. As a condition for a useful continuation, the
calculated muscle moment arms (Chapter 3) and maximal isometric moments (Chapter 4)
should be in agreement with measurements on single muscles in the literature (e.g. tendon
excursion studies). The moment arms of the muscle elements appeared consistent with the
relatively wide range in the literature (in most cases 2-3 cm). In general differences with
moment arms of single muscles were smaller than 2 cm. Maximal isometric joint moments
calculated over the total range of motion fell within the 95% confidence interval of a
number of studies reporting in vivo measured maximal voluntary moments. These
comparisons further increased the confidence in the anatomical parameters and the model
structure. Yet, for the knee extensors and plantar flexors the reduction of the complex
muscle architecture to a Hill model resulted in eminent deviations with in vivo moments. A
morphological instead of a lumped muscle model is required to describe the complex
deformations in these muscles. When using the Hill model an adaptation of tendon length
was needed to obtain a good fit.
Subsequently, muscle contraction, excitation and activation dynamics were included in the
TLEM (Chapter 5). Muscle forces during a measured normal gait cycle have been
124                                                                                 Chapter 7



optimized using a novel optimization approach. Besides an inverse muscle model, a
forward model was utilized to account for muscle dynamics. A new energy function was
used as objective function. This cost function resulted in realistic muscle synergies.
Predicted neural inputs agreed with measured EMG and joint compression forces were
consistent with in vivo measured joint forces reported in the literature.
In the final step the TLEM was applied in a clinical case study (Chapter 6). This study
showed that the model can provide relevant insights in clinical issues. Yet many
improvements can still be made. The collection of more consistent datasets is
recommended to obtain scaling regression equations that relate externally measurable
variables with internal variables. This will allow more accurate scaling of the model to a
subject, which is a condition for a successful subject specific investigation.
In the following paragraphs the strengths and added value of the model will be discussed
by comparing it to existing models from the literature. Subsequently, its limitations are
described and recommendations for future improvements and applications are pictured.




7.2      Model strength and added value

7.2.1    Consistent and extensive anatomical dataset

An important message spread throughout the chapters of this thesis is the relevance of
consistent model parameters. Existing comprehensive musculoskeletal models (e.g. (Delp
et al., 1990, Anderson and Pandy, 2001, Higginson et al., 2006, Glitsch and Baumann,
1997)) are inconsistent as they are based on the model parameters measured on different
subjects. In some cases up to 10 different sources were used to construct a model
(Pierrynowski, 1995). The merging of datasets and guessing of missing parameters allows a
model developer to select the most appropriate set of parameters from different subjects
such that a good fit is obtained with in vivo data. This may be functional but errors and
inconsistencies are inevitable. The combined datasets result in an anatomical configuration
that never existed. (Unknown) interactions between different anatomical parameters are
lost. Frequently used datasets have been measured more than 2 decades ago (e.g.(Brand
and Crowinshield, 1982, Wickiewicz et al., 1983)). Important, sometimes novel insights
such as the relevance of curving muscle lines and sufficient muscle lines per muscle (Van
der Helm and Veenbaas, 1991) have not been taken into account in these studies. This
results in an insufficiently accurate discretization of the musculoskeletal system which has a
large effect on model output. For example inaccurate moment arms will affect the length
change of the muscle and thus the force-length and force-velocity relation. This causes
inaccurate muscle force boundaries in a muscle force optimization. To upgrade the quality
of these data some researchers added extra information such as via points throughout the
General Discussion                                                                        125



years (Delp et al., 1990). However many of these parameters are not based on anatomical
measurements but on assumptions based on visual appearance on bones in model
simulations. Via points can only be implemented successfully if these points are more or
less fixed to the bone when the joint angle varies. If the muscle or tendon can freely move
over the bone, curvature should be implemented with wrapping geometries. Such model
parameters require accurate measurements. Yet, to date anatomical datasets are being used
of which the accuracy relies on educated guesses of missing parameters and scaling
parameters for merging.
The current study started from scratch at the dissection room by uncovering each single
muscle of the lower extremity and measuring all the relevant geometries and force
generating parameter. The close connection between the development of the TLEM and
the collection of an anatomical dataset is powerful, since the modeling of the
musculoskeletal system starts with the dissection, for example in the choice how a muscle
is divided based on observed morphological differences. Comparison with maximal
isometric muscle forces based on the dataset of Delp et al. (1990) showed that difference in
contributions of muscles can be substantial (chapter 4). The current dataset is considered
to be more accurate since inconsistencies and inaccuracies due to scaling are omitted.



7.2.2    Extensive validation: model in agreement with literature

Although the used validation methods in the current study have some limitations that should
be taken into account (see next paragraph), the TLEM is still more extensively validated than
many other models. The moment arms and maximal isometric moments of the current model
have been reported and compared with available sources in the literature showing that the
geometry of the model is trustworthy. Reporting these outputs gives a user of the TLEM the
opportunity to evaluate if the model is sufficiently accurate for a specific purpose. Many
models (e.g. (Thelen and Anderson, 2006, Higginson et al., 2006, Anderson and Pandy,
2001)) are based on the dataset reported by Delp et al. (1990). Yet, the corresponding muscle
moment arms have not been reported and validated in the literature. As a result the accuracy
of the geometry and model output is unknown.
In several studies muscle force has been compared with general EMG patterns (Anderson
and Pandy, 2001). Yet, the relation between EMG and muscle force represents a second
order system and is therefore not directly comparable (Lloyd and Besier, 2003). In the current
study a comparison is made with neural input. Since the muscle dynamics are taken into
account, this comparison is more accurate. Furthermore, EMG and kinematics were
measured on the same subject. This makes the comparison of the predicted neural input with
EMG more straightforward than a comparison with EMG measured on different subjects, as
it excludes differences due to inter-individual variation. The comparison showed that dynamic
model properties are in agreement with EMG and in vivo measured compression forces.
126                                                                                 Chapter 7



7.2.3    Novel optimization approach

The study of individual force contributions of muscles is highly dependent on the
distribution of the load over the different muscles. The current model uses a novel
optimization approach to solve the load sharing problem (chapter 5). By including a
forward muscle model into an inverse optimization method, muscle dynamics are included
in the force boundaries (figure 1). This enforces, in contrary to several other models
(Crowninshield and Brand, 1981, Glitsch and Baumann, 1997, Heller et al., 2001), realistic
transitions in muscle force. Instantaneous switches in muscle force are prevented by
defining muscle force boundaries which are in agreement with excitation and activation
dynamics. Anderson and Pandy (2001) used a forward dynamic musculoskeletal model to
optimize muscle activations by minimizing metabolic energy. Simulated moments were
used as an input in a static model and it was concluded that static and dynamic
optimization is practically equivalent. This statement is in disagreement with the findings of
this study. One explanation is that only one cost function was investigated in the study of
Anderson. Cost functions like the minimization of the sum of muscle force as used by
Heller et al. (2001) resulted in large differences in muscle force between static and dynamic
optimization in the current study. Furthermore the study of Anderson was based on
simulated moments instead of measured joint torques as in the current study. This
underrates the relevance of muscle dynamics.
The objective function used in the current study was based on the energy consumption of
the muscle (Praagman et al., 2006). With near infrared spectroscopy it was shown for elbow
and forearm muscles that this cost function resulted in a load sharing that is better in
agreement with energy consumption than a conventional and frequently used force related
cost function (see (Erdemir et al., 2007) for an overview of cost functions). Since the
energy function is weighted with both muscle mass and fiber lengths also smaller muscle
contribute to the joint torques resulting in more realistic muscle synergies. Measured EMG
was in good agreement with calculated neural inputs. Furthermore, simulations were fast
and stable. The gain of IFDO is that it includes the advantages of both inverse and forward
dynamic simulations. It uses a forward muscle model to include muscle dynamics in the
force boundaries. The optimization, based on measured kinematics, is an inverse dynamic
solution and therefore much faster than conventional forward simulations of
musculoskeletal models.
General Discussion                                                                           127




7.3      Model limitations

When utilizing the musculoskeletal model as presented in this thesis, its limitations should
be taken into account.



7.3.1    Discretization of the musculoskeletal system

The mapping of the complex architecture of the human locomotor apparatus with a limited
set of anatomical model parameters is a reduction of the real situation. In the TLEM, a
muscle is represented by a maximum of 12 muscle elements each containing a set of
measured muscle properties (e.g. optimal fiber length). Although this is a great
improvement in comparison to other comprehensive models, the limitations of the
discretization of the musculoskeletal system should be considered.
In the model, muscles are represented as Hill-type muscle elements consisting of an active
contractile element, a series elastic element and a parallel elastic element (Hill, 1938). In the
Hill model a muscle is considered as one large sarcomere scaled with a fiber length, PCSA
and pennation angle corresponding to the part of the muscle that is represented. In the
literature several extensions of this ‘classic’ Hill model have been reported. In some studies
extra elastic elements, dashpots and muscle mass elements were added (e.g. in (Winters and
Woo, 1990)). Other studies reported algorithms to estimate the parameters of the model,
for example the optimization of the tendon slack length in order to fit the model with in
vivo data of a subject (Manal and Buchanan, 2004). However, these data were based on
assumptions of which the accuracy could not be confirmed as the actual value cannot be
measured on the subject. In the current study a musculoskeletal model was reported based
on accurate measurements on one subject. Parameters that could not be measured on the
specimen, such as the specific muscle tension and tendon slack lengths, were based on
existing data from the literature. Based on the available validation methods (maximal
voluntary moments, joint compression force, EMG) the validity of the model appeared
appropriate for most muscles. For future developments of the model, scaling of measured
model parameters to a subject will be an important point of improvement (see next
paragraph). With further progress towards a more extensive subject specific and clinical
model application it should be reconsidered if it is worth the cost to add more complexity
to the model.
Based on the results of the current study it was shown that a representation of plantar
flexors and knee extensors with a Hill model leads to deviations in angle of peak moment
with respect to in vivo data. The main shortcoming is that the deformations in these
muscles cannot be accurately described with the Hill model. Although adaptations in
tendon length resulted in a good fit, further research is required to provide more insight in
the functioning of these muscles. Since many parameters are unknown, an important step
128                                                                                Chapter 7



to be made is a more extensive collection of architectural properties of these muscles such
as the mapping of complex structures of connected aponeuroses. By implementing such
properties in a finite element model of the muscle architecture, a better representation of
the complex deformations in the muscle can be obtained resulting in a better fit with in
vivo data (e.g. (Yucesoy, 2003)). Another example is the representation of possible
distributions of fibers with different sarcomere length in the model, which will possibly
widen the force length curve as shown in previous studies (Willems and Huijing, 1994).
This would require extensive measurements of sarcomere lengths within one muscle. One
of the limitations which should be taken into account is that the integration of a finite
element muscle model in the current musculoskeletal model would increase the
computational load drastically, making the use of the model less practical. Besides,
parameters are based on a muscle in a one static position. The actual deformations during
movement remain uncertain. Imaging methods such as ultrasound can provide more
insight in for example fiber length and orientation during movement (e.g. (Maganaris,
2001)). This can be used for further improvements of the muscle model. Yet, only to a
limited extent since some properties are not or hardly visible when using these non-
invasive methods (e.g. sarcomere length, deformation of aponeuroses). Successful
implementation of muscle models based on finite elements in a comprehensive
musculoskeletal model as in the current study has not been reported in the literature.
A muscle is represented as a straight or curved line in the current model. Describing a
muscle as a volume would result in an improved estimation of muscle moment arm. Some
authors used MRI to define muscle volumes in musculoskeletal models (e.g. (Blemker and
Delp, 2005)). However, these methods still have many uncertainties such as the change in
volume due to activation and change in orientation with varying joint angles. This hampers
a realistic implementation.
Muscle elements are represented as individual actuators. Studies in rats showed that in
gastrocnemius and extensor digitorum longus muscle force is also transmitted via the fascia
(e.g. (Huijing, 1999)). Yet, experimental data of myofascial force transmission between the
muscles of the lower extremity in humans measured during gait is lacking. Therefore,
muscles were considered individually.
The TLEM is based on a specimen measured in one position. By prescribing rotations with
respect to joints the new position of the anatomical structures can be determined. It should
be realized that when deviations from the initial position are large, inaccuracies are
inevitably. Validation studies showed that gait, which has relatively small joint angles, can
be accurately simulated with the model. Analysis of motor tasks with very large joint angles,
such as squats with knee angles up to 130 degrees require more sophisticated joint
definitions.
General Discussion                                                                      129



7.3.2    Validation methods

Validation of musculoskeletal models is limited since the available resources for validation
are limited.
The geometry as represented in the TLEM is validated by comparing muscle moment arms
with the literature. This showed that moment arms are in good agreement with existing
studies (e.g. (Klein et al., 1996, Maganaris, 2003, Spoor and van Leeuwen, 1992)). However
it should be realized that the comparison is indirect since the compared moment arms were
determined on different subjects. So, this study gives a good indication that model
geometry is realistically represented, yet the exact accuracy could not be quantified.
Moment arms determined with tendon excursion experiments on the same specimen
would allow a direct comparison resulting in more insight in the accuracy of the model
geometry. Yet, unfortunately this method also has its limitations. The multiple joint angles
which define the amplitude of the moment arm make it practically impossible to tendon
excursions for all muscles and combinations of degrees of freedom. Secondly, the muscles
of the specimen are stiffened due to the embalming process which hinders a joint rotation
and subsequent measurement of the excursion of a tendon. All muscles fibers should be
cut and cleared away to allow free movement. This is impracticable in combination with
the extensive cadaver measurements as described in chapter 2. Finally, for muscles with
broad attachment sites with fibers attaching directly to the bone (e.g. gluteus maximus) the
accuracy of measurement of muscle excursion is disputable.
In vivo measurements of muscle force have only been conducted during surgery and
sporadically during a movement by using buckle transducers in superficial tendons (Finni et
al., 1998). Yet, the actual force of the majority of muscles during motor tasks is unknown.
Therefore, to evaluate the validity of muscle forces, joint compression force is calculated
and compared with in vivo measured joint compression force in subjects with
instrumented prostheses (Bergmann et al., 2001, D'Lima et al., 2006). Previous models
resulted in unrealistic high compression forces during gait, probably due to
underestimation of muscle moment arms (e.g. (Glitsch and Baumann, 1997)). Since
curvatures of muscle lines were not included, more force was required to generate the
required torques. Another cause is an insufficient number of muscle lines. Equilibration of
a torque around one axis can result in an unwanted torque around another axis, resulting in
compensating forces in muscles and an increase of joint compression force. The current
study (Chapter 2, 3 and 4) showed a good resemblance with in vivo measurements making
the model more trustworthy. Yet, to date the available resources for validation are limited.
Only one study reports both in vivo measured compression forces and corresponding
kinematics for 4 subjects (Bergmann et al., 2001). But regrettably the measured motion
could not be reconstructed due to a lack of data for definition of the local coordinate
frames of the segments. Without these data joint angles as input in the TLEM cannot be
matched with the reported joint torques corresponding to these subjects (Heller et al.,
130                                                                                Chapter 7



2001). Therefore only an indirect comparison was possible. The actual force of the
individual muscles remains unknown. Surface EMG was used to study individual muscle
groups. However, activation patterns of deeper lying muscles are immeasurable and thus
not validated in the current study. The use of needle EMG would provide more insight in
activation patterns in these muscles. Yet, it should be taken into account that this method
is less practical since movement is restricted by the needles.
The TLEM is scaled to fit with the segment dimensions of a subject. The internal
parameters are scaled based on the same scaling ratios. Yet, this assumption cannot be
validated since these model parameters cannot be obtained in a subject. Future directions
for validation are given in the next paragraph.



7.4      Recommendations for future research

7.4.1    Collection of more consistent datasets

In contrast to other existing comprehensive musculoskeletal models, the geometry and
force generating parameters in the TLEM were all based on one subject, which is an
important step forward. The parameters were scaled to an individual subject using the
subject’s segment dimensions (chapter 5). Yet the validation of these scaling routines is not
possible since there is only one dataset available. For accurate scaling of model parameters
to a subject to account for inter-individual differences and to obtain population
characteristics and co-variation estimates, the collection of much more (e.g. n>100)
extensive consistent anatomical datasets is required. This would provide insight how
different parameters relate and affect each other and form one consistent whole. With
these data accurate and extensive scaling regression equations can be defined based on
externally measurable subject geometry. This will improve the resemblance of the model
with the anatomy of the subject. For the upper extremity a few of these scaling studies have
already been reported (Murray et al., 2002, Kaptein and van der Helm, 2004). For example
an MRI study showed that peak moment arm of the triceps is significantly related to the
dimensions of the ulna (Murray et al., 2002). This is a clear example how an externally
measurable property can be related to a moment arm which is invisible from the outside.
Although, it should be realized that for many muscles, moment arms based on MRI have a
disputable accuracy. Muscle attachment sites of large muscle with fibers attaching directly
to the bone are hardly visible in MRI. Furthermore parameters such as sarcomere length
cannot be obtained with these methods.
The number of inputs of a scaling regression based on cadaver studies can be adapted to
the number parameters that are available or required to describe the geometry of the
subject. When the geometry of a subject falls well in the range of the measured specimens
General Discussion                                                                        131



it might for example be sufficient to use positions of a number of bony landmarks as input
in the regression equation to scale a muscle attachment site or a muscle parameter. On the
other hand when the model is used for patients that fall outside the range, for example due
to large deformations of bones, additional properties of the subject may be included such
as 3D bone geometries measured with MRI or CT. Based on three cadaveric shoulders it
was shown that most attachment contours can be predicted by fitting one bone to the
other (Kaptein and van der Helm, 2004). Yet, still 30% of inter-individual variation could
not be distinguished. Including more specimens and more properties in the regression
would increase the accuracy.
In chapter 6 the TLEM was scaled to a child with large deformations in the femur (subject
nr. 1) using only segment dimensions. The determined joint torques cannot be generated
by the muscles in the model. It is very likely that in reality the deformations of the femur
result in different moment arms which allow muscles to generate the measured torques. By
including bone deformations in the regression equations a more realistic representation can
be obtained in these patients leading to a better representation of muscle line of action.
The collection of multiple consistent datasets require a great effort that can only be carried
out by a close corporation of many research groups all using the same protocol. Currently
much effort is spent on the development of a software platform that allows simulations
that can be exchanged, tested, analysed and improved in a multi-institutional collaboration
(Delp et al., 2007). This platform could also play an important role in the collaboration and
communication required for collection of these datasets.



7.4.2    Validation of more subjects, muscles and tasks

5 healthy subjects (1 adult, 4 children) were investigated in the current study (Chapter 4 and
5), showing compression forces and activation patterns that were in agreement with
measured EMG and data from the literature.
By measuring more EMG patterns in combination with kinematics, in more subjects and
during different tasks, for example different walking speeds, the validity of the TLEM can
be evaluated in more conditions. This will provide more insight in the accuracy of the used
methods, which can be used for further refinements of optimization methods and scaling.
In a recent study it was shown that strategies to perform a motor task of the upper
extremity varied among subjects, depending on inter-individual differences in PCSA and
moment arm (PhD thesis Praagman, 2007). An extensive set of experimental data for the
lower extremity can be used to investigate if the load sharing in the current model accounts
for such differences. This requires accurate scaling as described earlier to account for
morphological difference. Furthermore it should be investigated if subject specific tuning
of a cost function is required to match with the subject.
132                                                                                Chapter 7



Extensive experimental data can also be used to incorporate EMG data in the optimization
by forcing neural inputs to resemble EMG patterns. The current study showed that co-
contraction of the knee muscles to stabilize the knee during impact was not predicted by
the model (chapter 5). Since the external knee torque does not require activity of the knee
extensors, these muscles are not activated when only energy is minimized. By measuring
more EMG data this could be confirmed for more subjects and improved in the model by
including EMG in the optimization. It was shown that EMG accurately predicted knee
moments using EMG driven musculoskeletal models (Lloyd and Besier, 2003). Yet, it
should be taken into account that EMG can only be used in addition to the energy cost
function in comprehensive musculoskeletal models as the EMG patterns of many muscles
are immeasurable.
Finally, the collection of in vivo compression forces and corresponding kinematics in more
subjects is encouraged. Measured kinematics as input for calculation of joint force allows a
clear validation as the predicted force should match in vivo data. Unfortunately this is
limited to a relatively few patients with an instrumented hip prosthesis. Measurements of
maximal voluntary contractions can provide useful insights in the accuracy of the scaling of
the strength of the model.



7.4.3    Forward dynamic simulations

The outputs that can be generated with the musculoskeletal model presented in this thesis
are based on inverse dynamic simulations. This allows investigation of a wide variety of
clinical issues. For example to calculate the maximal isometric joint torques after a tendon
transfer, which is a measure that provides insight in the patient’s potential to perform a
certain task after surgery (e.g. (Veeger et al., 2004)).
To extend the field of application of the TLEM it is recommended to incorporate a
forward dynamic model. A large advantage of forward dynamic simulations is that the
effect of an intervention on the locomotion of a patient can be predicted. This is an
important output as the final aim of an intervention is to improve the movement potential
of a patient. Two important steps need to be taken for successful application of forward
models in a clinical practice. The first step is the reduction of the computational burden of
the multiple integrations in a forward simulation. In the Delft Shoulder and Elbow model
IFDOC (inverse forward dynamic optimization with controller), a method for forward
optimization of the model, is used to tackle this problem (Chadwick and Van der Helm,
2003). The method obtains a fast and near optimal forward solution by starting from an
inverse-dynamic solution determined with IFDO (see figure 1). With inverse dynamically
optimized states of the different muscles as an input (as described in chapter 5), a forward
muscle model is integrated resulting in the forces acting in the muscles. Subsequent
integration of the equations of motion results in the movement of the segments. By
comparing measured and simulated joint angles and velocities, errors due to discrete time
General Discussion                                                                                 133




                                Inverse simulations

                                                 States muscle model
                                    Fmin, Fmax
                                                                         Inverse
INPUT:
                  Musculo Moment arm(d)              Load       Fmus     muscle
Measured
                  skeletal                           sharing             model
kinematics
                  geometry                                                CE    SE
                           Joint torques(M)
                                                                               PE




                                           SURGICAL                    SURGICAL
                                           INTERVENTIONS               INTERVENTIONS


                                                                         Forward
                  Predicted
                                                 Musculo                 muscle
                  •kinematics                    skeletal                model
                                                 geometry      Fmus       CE    SE
                  •joint load
                                                                               PE



                                     Forward simulations


Figure 1 IFDOC: inverse forward dynamics optimization with controller. IFDOC starts with an
inverse simulation with muscle force boundaries depending on the states of the muscle model,
indicated with the upper dotted line (IFDO). The calculated muscle activations are used as input in a
forward dynamic simulation. By comparing measured and simulated joint torques, errors due to
discrete time modeling can be corrected using a simple feedback controller. The error torque is fed
back into the inverse optimization, preventing instabilities of the system. Subsequently, the effect of
an intervention can be implemented by adapting model parameters and simulated using the obtained
stable activation patterns as input.



modeling can be determined. A simple feedback controller corrects for these errors by
calculating a correction moment which is fed back to the inverse optimization. These small
adaptations in joint moments prevent instabilities of the system. By using IFDOC in the
current model, inputs of the muscle model can be determined that result in a stable
movement. Subsequently, the effect of an intervention on this movement can be
determined by integrating the system with these input states but with adapted muscle
parameters. Computed Muscle Control is another option to improve performance of
forward simulations in comprehensive musculoskeletal models. This method has been
applied in a comprehensive model of the lower extremity (Thelen and Anderson, 2006).
The approach is comparable to IFDOC. The difference with IFDOC is the feedback of
joint angles and velocities instead of joint moments.
A second challenge in a forward simulation is the accurate modeling of the mechanics of
the foot. By integrating a forward muscle model, resulting muscle forces generate
movement of segments. When the foot segment hits the ground both the ground reaction
134                                                                                   Chapter 7



force as the deformation of the foot should be accurately described. The ground reaction
force affects the torques with respect to the joints and thus the movement of these joints.
The deformation of the foot affects the position of the ankle and the other, more proximal
joints. Inaccuracies in joint positions and joint torques result in instabilities in the system
hampering a successful clinical application. To accurately describe the deformation of the
foot and the resulting position of the ankle, a sophisticated foot model is required. Thelen
et al. (2006) used springs and dampers under the foot to fit simulated with measured
ground reaction force. Yet, to predict the movement of a patient after surgery,
experimental data cannot be used as these are not available. Therefore the interaction of
the foot with the floor should be modeled very accurately. Incorrect predictions of ground
reaction forces result in deviations in joint torques and subsequent movement of the
segments. A subject-specific foot model that fulfills these requirements does not exist. The
development of a model that accurately describes the interactions of the many bones and
passive and active structures requires a major effort with probably a long way to go. In the
meantime forward simulations of comprehensive musculoskeletal models are only possible
by tracking experimental data.
The effects of ligaments were excluded in the inverse dynamic optimization since small
errors in joint parameters, joint angles and location of attachment sites of ligaments will
cause unrealistically high forces in ligaments and consequently unrealistically high muscle
forces. Yet, in a forward dynamic optimization the ligaments of the hip knee and ankle as
measured in the dissection study (Chapter 2) can be included in the cost function of the
optimization affecting the movement such that the forces in the ligaments are minimal.



7.4.4    Clinical model application

This study aimed to develop a musculoskeletal model which can be used for evaluation of
if-then scenarios with respect to the treatment of gait disorders. In the clinical case study in
chapter 6 a first step was taken to apply the TLEM for this purpose. The study aimed to
relate deformations of the femur observed in myelomeningocele patients with abnormal
hip compression forces. A better insight in the cause of these deformations would improve
orthopedic treatment. Although a direct relation could not be determined yet, this study
was the first that reports hip compression forces in myelomeningocele patients. A
comparison with healthy children showed that joint torques and compression forces are
different and abnormal in the patients. This study clarified next steps for improvements of
the TLEM. The success of a subject-specific model application is highly dependent on the
scaling of the model parameters. The more divergent a subject, the more variables should
be included in the scaling routine. The generic model as presented allows investigation of
many clinical issues. Several projects have already been initiated: To estimate the risk of
fractures of a metastasized femur in bone cancer patient a finite element model of the
femur is developed based on CT data. The current model can be used to estimate femur
General Discussion                                                                        135



loads in activities of daily living. In another study new tendon transfer techniques are
simulated to evaluate whether deficiencies in hip abductors torques after hip
transplantation can be compensated. The study aims to improve treatment methods and
prevent instable hips in these patients after transplantation. Much effort is spent on
ambulatory measurement of kinematics of a subject using inertial sensors and force shoes
(e.g. (Roetenberg et al., 2007, Schepers et al., 2007)). Accurate ambulatory kinematic data of
a subject open many other fields of application of the TLEM. For example, to develop an
ergonomic deliberate working environment by estimating peak joint compression forces
during a working day.



7.5      Concluding remarks

        This study presented a consistent comprehensive musculoskeletal model of the
         lower extremity. The added value is that the discretization of the human
         locomotor apparatus is more extensive and more accurate since errors due to
         merging of datasets are omitted.
        Moment arm and maximal isometric moments are in agreement with the
         literature. Therefore model geometry and force generating properties are
         considered trustworthy.
        A morphological muscle model is required to describe the complex deformations
         in soleus and knee extensors.
        A novel muscle force optimization approach was used, resulting in more realistic
         muscle synergies. Results are in agreement with EMG and in vivo measured hip
         compression forces.
        More consistent datasets are required to obtain scaling regression equations that
         relate externally measurable variables with internal variables. This will allow
         accurate scaling of the model to a subject, which is a condition for a successful
         application in a clinical practice.
136                                                                                 Chapter 7




7.6      References

Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 2001. Static and dynamic optimization solutions for gait are
          practically equivalent. Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 153-61.
Bergmann, G., Deuretzbacher, G., Heller, M., Graichen, F., Rohlmann, A., Strauss,
          J.,Duda, G. N., 2001. Hip contact forces and gait patterns from routine activities.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 859-71.
Blemker, S. S.,Delp, S. L., 2005. Three-dimensional representation of complex muscle
          architectures and geometries. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 33, 661-73.
Brand, R. A.,Crowinshield, R. D., 1982. A model of lower extremity muscular anatomy.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 104, 153-161.
Chadwick, E. K.,Van Der Helm, F. C. (2003) Combined inverse/forward dynamic
          optimization of a large-scale biomechanical model of the shoulder and elbow.
          International symposium on computer simulation in biomechanics. Sydney.
Crowninshield, R. D.,Brand, R. A., 1981. A physiologically based criterion of muscle force
          prediction in locomotion. Journal of Biomechanics, 14, 793-801.
D'lima, D. D., Patil, S., Steklov, N., Slamin, J. E.,Colwell, C. W., Jr., 2006. Tibial forces
          measured in vivo after total knee arthroplasty. Journal of Arthroplasty, 21, 255-62.
Delp, S. L., Anderson, F. C., Arnold, A. S., Loan, J. P., Habib, A., John, C. T.,
          Guendelman, E.,Thelen, D. G., 2007. OpenSim: Open-source software to create
          and analyse dynamic simulations of movement. IEEE Transactions on
          Biomedical Engineering, 00014, 1-12.
Delp, S. L., Loan, J. P., Hoy, M. G., Zajac, F. E., Topp, E. L.,Rosen, J. M., 1990. An
          interactive graphics-based model of the lower extremity to study orthopaedic
          surgical procedures. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 37, 757-67.
Erdemir, A., Mclean, S., Herzog, W.,Van Den Bogert, A. J., 2007. Model-based estimation
          of muscle forces exerted during movements. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol,
          Avon), 22, 131-54.
Finni, T., Komi, P. V.,Lukkariniemi, J., 1998. Achilles tendon loading during walking:
          application of a novel optic fiber technique. European Journal of Applied
          Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 77, 289-91.
Glitsch, U.,Baumann, W., 1997. The three-dimensional determination of internal loads in
          the lower extremity. Journal of Biomechanics, 30, 1123-31.
Heller, M. O., Bergmann, G., Deuretzbacher, G., Durselen, L., Pohl, M., Claes, L., Haas,
          N. P.,Duda, G. N., 2001. Musculo-skeletal loading conditions at the hip during
          walking and stair climbing. Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 883-93.
Higginson, J. S., Zajac, F. E., Neptune, R. R., Kautz, S. A., Burgar, C. G.,Delp, S. L., 2006.
          Effect of equinus foot placement and intrinsic muscle response on knee extension
          during stance. Gait and Posture, 23, 32-6.
Hill, A. V., 1938. The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle. proc. R Soc
          Lond B, 126, 136-195.
Huijing, P., 1999. Muscular force transmission: a unified, dual or multiple system? A review
          and some explorative experimental results. Archives of Physiology and
          Biochemistry, 107, 292-311.
Kaptein, B. L.,Van Der Helm, F. C., 2004. Estimating muscle attachment contours by
          transforming geometrical bone models. Journal of Biomechanics, 37, 263-73.
General Discussion                                                                        137



Klein, P., Mattys, S.,Rooze, M., 1996. Moment arm length variations of selected muscles
          acting on talocrural and subtalar joints during movement: an in vitro study.
          Journal of Biomechanics, 29, 21-30.
Lloyd, D. G.,Besier, T. F., 2003. An EMG-driven musculoskeletal model to estimate
          muscle forces and knee joint moments in vivo. Journal of Biomechanics, 36, 765-
          76.
Maganaris, C. N., 2001. Force-length characteristics of in vivo human skeletal muscle. Acta
          Physiologica Scandinavica, 172, 279-85.
Maganaris, C. N., 2003. Force-length characteristics of the in vivo human gastrocnemius
          muscle. Clinical Anatomy, 16, 215-23.
Manal, K.,Buchanan, T. S., 2004. Subject-Specific estimates of tendon slack length: A
          numerical method. Journal of applied biomechanics, 20, 195-203.
Murray, W. M., Buchanan, T. S.,Delp, S. L., 2002. Scaling of peak moment arms of elbow
          muscles with upper extremity bone dimensions. Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 19-
          26.
Pierrynowski, M. R., 1995. Analytic representation of muscle line of action and geometry,
          in: Allard, P., Stokes, I. A. F. & Blanchi, J. P. (Eds.) Three-Dimensional Analysis
          of Human Movement. Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL, pp. 214-256.
Praagman, M., Chadwick, E. K., Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veeger, H. E., 2006. The
          relationship between two different mechanical cost functions and muscle oxygen
          consumption. Journal of Biomechanics, 39, 758-65.
Roetenberg, D., Slycke, P. J.,Veltink, P. H., 2007. Ambulatory position and orientation
          tracking fusing magnetic and inertial sensing. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
          Engineering, 54, 883-90.
Schepers, H. M., Koopman, H. F.,Veltink, P. H., 2007. Ambulatory assessment of ankle
          and foot dynamics. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, 54, 895-902.
Spoor, C. W.,Van Leeuwen, J. L., 1992. Knee muscle moment arms from MRI and from
          tendon travel. Journal of Biomechanics, 25, 201-6.
Thelen, D. G.,Anderson, F. C., 2006. Using computed muscle control to generate forward
          dynamic simulations of human walking from experimental data. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 39, 1107-15.
Van Der Helm, F. C.,Veenbaas, R., 1991. Modelling the mechanical effect of muscles with
          large attachment sites: application to the shoulder mechanism. Journal of
          Biomechanics, 24, 1151-63.
Veeger, H. E., Kreulen, M.,Smeulders, M. J., 2004. Mechanical evaluation of the Pronator
          Teres rerouting tendon transfer. Journal of Hand Surgery. British Volume, 29,
          259-64.
Wickiewicz, T. L., Roy, R. R., Powell, P. L.,Edgerton, V. R., 1983. Muscle architecture of
          the human lower limb. Clinical Orthopaedics, 275-83.
Willems, M. E.,Huijing, P. A., 1994. Heterogeneity of mean sarcomere length in different
          fibres: effects on length range of active force production in rat muscle. European
          Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 68, 489-96.
Winters, J. M.,Woo, S. L. Y. 1990 Multiple muscle systems, Biomechanics and Movement
          Organisation, New York, Springer-Verlag.
Yucesoy, C. (2003) Intra-,inter- and extramuscular myofascial force transmission. PhD
          Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede.
Appendix                                        139




                                     Appendix




Additional information about the Twente Lower

Extremity Model (TLEM)
140                                                                                                Appendix




Model structure

The Twente Lower Extremity Model (TLEM) has been programmed in SPACAR. This
computer program is based on the finite element method, which is a suitable method for
kinematic and dynamic analyses of multibody models (van Soest et al., 1992, van der Helm,
1994). In SPACAR there are three basic elements with predefined mechanical properties:
HINGE, TRUSS and MULTINODE. Each element is represented by one or more
position nodes and/or orientation nodes. With the coordinates of the nodes the
deformation modes of the element are determined. For example the deformation mode of
a TRUSS element (figure 1), the elongation ε1 with respect to its initial length l0, is
determined with the coordinates of its two position nodes P(x,y,z) and Q(x,y,z):


:          ε1 = ( x p − xq ) 2 + ( y p − yq ) 2 + ( z p − zq ) 2 − l0                                 (1)



                                   y       P

                                                            Deformed position
                                                 ε1
                                                             Q

                                                               x
                                       P                   Q       Initial position

                          z                       l0

Figure 1 TRUSS element in the initial position and deformed position. The elongation ε1 is defined by position
node P and Q (Jonker, 1988, Van der Helm, 1991).


A model is defined as a number of elements that are connected by shared common nodes.
The kinematic and dynamic behaviour, described by the equations of motion, is fully
determined by the generalised coordinates. If the model is mechanically consistent, the
unknown coordinates of the other nodes and deformations can be calculated iteratively
based on the generalised coordinates. For inverse calculations, the generalised coordinates
are pre-described coordinates and/or deformations. In forward dynamic analyses, driving
moments and muscle forces are the input to the model.
The TLEM comprises connected elements, each representing the relevant morphological
structures of the lower extremity: segments, joints, muscles and ligaments. The parameters
of each element were based on one recently measured anatomical dataset for the right leg
(Klein Horsman et al., 2007). Parameters for the left lower extremity have been determined
Appendix                                                                                                      141



by mirroring the measured data of the right lower extremity in the mid-sagittal plane,
defined by the plane perpendicular to the global z-axis through the midpoint of the right
and left anterior iliac spine of the pelvis.
Segment coordinate systems were determined as described by the Standardization and
Terminology Committee of the International Society of Biomechanics (Wu et al., 2002).
The foot and talus coordinate systems were calculated analogous to that for the calcaneus.
The segments with their attachment sites and joint parameters were rotated from the
‘measured specimen position’ as measured on the specimen to the so-called ‘initial model
position’. This was done by prescribing the required deformation of the generalised
coordinates. In the measured specimen position, the hip was externally rotated, the knee
extended and the ankle in plantar flexion. In the initial model position the local pelvis
coordinate system was aligned with the global reference frame and all the joints were in a
neutral position (table 1). Joint angles in this study are presented with respect to the initial
model position. In the next paragraphs the different elements in the TLEM will be described
in more detail (see for overview figure 2).

Table 1 Relative segment angles of right lower extremity in the initial model position calculated with an euler XYZ
decomposition (in radians).

Segment                     X                            Y                            Z
Global/Pelvis               0                            0                            0
Pelvis/Femur                -0.07                        0.05                         0.00
Femur/Tibia                 0.26                         -0.61                        0.16
Tibia/Talus                 0.14                         0.59                         -0.01
Talus/Foot                  0                            0                            0




Body segments

The TLEM consisted of 12 body segments: HAT (Head, Arms, Trunk), pelvis and right
and left femur, patella, tibia, talus and foot. A body segment was modelled as a
MULTINODE element representing a rigid body. The mass and the center of mass were
assigned to the position node and rotational inertia to the orientation node of the
MULTINODE element.



Joints

The segments were connected by a common position node on two MULTINODE
elements representing the rotation center. The orientation nodes of both MULTINODE
elements were connected to a HINGE element. The two corresponding orientation nodes
142                                                                                   Appendix



of the HINGE element define its deformation mode, the amount of rotation with respect
to the rotation axis of the joint.
The following 11 joints were used in the model: L5S1 joint and the left and right hip, knee,
patella/femur joint, talocrural joint and subtalar joint. The hip joint was modelled as a ball-
and-socket joint, defined by series of three orthogonal connected HINGES. The knee,
talocrural joint and subtalar joint were defined as a single HINGE element. The movement
of the patella was modelled by a deformation of a HINGE element with respect to the
femur, which described the rotation of the patella with respect to the femur. The patellar
ligament was defined as non deformable TRUSS element connected with two position
nodes to the tibia and the patella segment. Thus, without introducing an extra generalised
coordinate, using the knee angle, the orientation and position of the patella were
determined. The movement of the HAT segment with respect to the pelvis was described
by series of three orthogonal connected HINGES.
The TLEM has 21 generalised coordinates (DOF): the orientation and position of the
center of mass of the pelvis with respect to a 3D global frame (6 DOF) together with the
deformation (=rotation) around the initial axes of the HINGE elements of L5S1 (3 DOF)
and the right and left hip (2x3 DOF), knee (2x1 DOF), talocrural (2x1 DOF) and subtalar
joint (2x1 DOF). If an interaction between the feet and the ground is considered the
number of the DOF decreases, depending on the model describing this contact, with
maximal 12.



Muscles

Muscles are modelled as ACTIVE TRUSS elements. This force generating variant of a
TRUSS element has two position nodes and one deformation mode. On two
MULTINODE elements a position node was defined, representing the origin and insertion
of the muscle. If a muscle path was described by so-called ‘via’ points, the most distal via
point on the proximal segment, if present, was defined as origin of the TRUSS element, a
so-called pseudo origin. The same counts for a pseudo insertion defined as the most
proximal point on the distal segment. The ACTIVE TRUSS element has one deformation
mode: the elongation of the TRUSS. When a muscle is wrapping around a bony contour
without being restricted in movement by surrounding structures such as retinaculum and
tendon sheaths, the muscle was represented by a CURVED-ACTIVE-TRUSS element.
This variant of the TRUSS element has three position nodes and as deformation mode the
elongation of the shortest distance between two nodes around a predefined surface lying in
between. This surface, defined as geometric shape (cylinder, sphere or ellipsoid) was fixed
at a MULTINODE element. An example is the gastrocnemius, modelled as CURVED-
ACTIVE-TRUSS element, wrapping around the bony contour of the epicondyle of the
femur, which was defined as a cylinder.
Appendix                                                                                                       143




Figure 2 The Twente Lower Extremity Model. The upper graphs show pre-scribed joint rotations with respect to
5 DOF of the TLEM (note: total # DOF = 21). In the middle a frontal and side view of the TLEM during the
gait cycle. The gray dots represent bony landmarks. Light gray lines are rotation axes. ‘X’ represents the centre of
mass of the segments. Only 6 of 264 muscle lines and 1 of the 24 ligaments are showed here.
Graphs at the bottom show 4 examples of model outputs for the most proxima1of the 6 muscle elements of the
adductor longus. F-l is the normalized force length ratio (at optimal fiber length: F-l = 1). Lmus and Vmus are
respectively muscle length and speed divided by the optimal muscle length. Fmus is the optimized muscle force.
144                                                                                   Appendix



Muscle parameters (muscle mass, pennation angle, Physiological cross-sectional area
(PCSA), tendon length and optimal fiber length) were assigned to each ACTIVE TRUSS.
To describe the mechanical effect of muscles accurately, some muscles were split up into
multiple elements. This was done for muscles with large attachment sites, or with
differences in muscle parameters for different muscle parts. The muscle elements were
considered as independent actuators. The interaction with the other muscle elements is
considered negligible. The resulting model contains 264 ACTIVE TRUSS elements to
describe the mechanical effect of 76 muscles of both the lower extremities.



Ligaments

In reality ligaments constrain a movement between two connected segments, restraining
the degrees of freedom of a joint. A small length change of a ligament results in large
stresses in the ligament. Small errors in joint parameters, measurement of joint angles and
location of attachment sites of ligaments will lead to unrealistic high forces in ligaments and
consequently in unrealistic high muscle forces in an optimization. Therefore, ligaments
were described as non-force-generating TRUSS elements in an inverse dynamic analysis.
Model simulations give insight in length change of the ligament during the movement. The
model contains 24 truss elements representing ligaments of the hip, knee and ankle of both
extremities. In a forward dynamic optimization the mechanical effect of the ligaments will
be included in the model. The movement will be affected such that the stress in the
ligaments is minimal.



Scaling

The extent and way of scaling varies among different studies and is often underexposed.
Many studies used SIMM for definition of musculoskeletal geometry and force generating
properties and referred to Delp et al. (1990) (e.g. ((Higginson et al., 2006, Anderson and
Pandy, 2001)). However, in Delp’s paper a generic model was presented without scaling
routines (Delp et al., 1990). The SIMM 4.0 manual describes different scaling options for
musculoskeletal geometry, yet accompanying journal papers are lacking and the selected
scaling options are often unmentioned by the users. Furthermore, force generating muscle
properties are not scaled according to the SIMM manual. Several scaling assumptions have
been reported but vary among different studies. For example Hurwitz et al. (2003) doubled
maximal isometric force as defined in SIMM, besides adaptations in some, not further
specified, muscle lines of actions (Hurwitz et al., 2003). In another clinical study, 15
unspecified muscles were selected from the total of 43 muscles defined by Delp et al (1990)
to span the joints of the leg (Higginson et al., 2006). In that study force generating
Appendix                                                                                 145



properties were not adapted. In sum, scaling and adaptations in generic anatomical datasets
are often unclear.
In this paragraph the scaling routines are reported for all the parameters of the TLEM for
application to an individual. Finally, some examples are shown to illustrate how model
outputs are affected by scaling.



Scaling 1: Inertial properties

Segment mass, center of mass and principal moments of inertia of the subject were
calculated using regression equations (Koopman, 1989, Chandler et al., 1975) for the
following segments: HAT (head, arms, trunk), pelvis, left and right femur, tibia and foot.
The dimensions of the subject’s segments, which are the inputs of the regression equations,
were determined using the measured 3D position of the following bony landmarks: sacrum,
left and right anterior iliac spine, lateral femur epicondyle, later malleolus, heel and toe.

Scaling 2: Marker tracking

During a gait cycle, marker trajectories were collected that were mounted on the bony
landmarks. The bony landmarks as defined in the model were scaled to fit the subject’s
bony landmarks in a static standing pose, which defines the neutral joint position. In a
dynamic trial joint angles were calculated by optimizing the model markers to fit measured
marker trajectories using an approach described by Koopman et al. (1995).

Scaling 3: Musculoskeletal geometry

The musculoskeletal geometry consists of 3D locations of attachment sites of muscles,
wrapping surfaces, via points, joint rotation centers. By fitting the bony landmarks to the
subject a scaling vector in 3 dimensions can be determined for each of these parameters.
The geometrical parameters of a segment, defined as vectors within the local segment
frame, were multiplied with the scaling vector for each segment. The radii of wrapping
surfaces were scaled using the length ratio of the corresponding segments.

Scaling 4: Force generating parameters

The ratio of the length of a muscle element after and before scaling of the segments was
used to scale the corresponding optimal fiber length and tendon length. With the scaled
optimal fiber length, the force length relation could be determined. Muscle mass was scaled
using the ratio of the total body mass of the subject and the cadaver. The body mass,
length ratio for the subject and cadaver were divided and used to scale the PCSA. A
specific muscle tension of 45 N/cm2 was used, which agrees reasonably well with the
146                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix



literature (Fukunaga et al., 1996). This parameter together with the PCSA defines the
amplitude of the isometric force curve. Pennation angle was not scaled.

Examples: effect of scaling on model outputs

The TLEM is based on a male specimen with a total weight of 105 kg and length of 1.74
m. Some examples are shown below (figure 3) to illustrate how model outputs are affected
by scaling. The kinematic data of the gait cycle are measured on a healthy subject of 85 kg
and length of 1.85 m, as described in chapter 5.


                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                TLEM scaled
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TLEM scaled
                                                                                                                TLEM unscaled
           Hip flexion ( ← ) / extension ( → ) torque (Nm)




                                                              40                                                                                                                                                                      TLEM unscaled
                                                                                                                                                                              250

                                                              20
                                                                                                                                        Biceps Femoris Force (N)


                                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                              150
                                                             -20

                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                             -40


                                                             -60                                                                                                              50



                                                             -80                                                                                                               0
                                                                    10   20   30   40     50      60      70     80     90        100                                                   10    20    30    40     50      60    70      80     90      100
                                                                                    % of gait cycle                                                                                                        % of gait cycle


Figure 3 Example of the effect of scaling of segment length. The solid line shows the hip flexion torque during
the gait cycle based on segment lengths that fit with the subject. The dotted line shows the torques when the
segment length is unscaled. Besides the amplitude, scaling affects the shape of the torque curve and the part of the
gait cycle where joint torque crosses zero, which will affect the outcome of the optimization of muscle force.
The graph on the right shows the resulting force in the biceps femoris. This typical example shows the relevance
of accurate segment scaling as a small deviation in body length (1.85-1.75 m) results in large differences in peak
force muscle force.


                                                              60                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                       inertial parameters -50%                                                                                                inertial parameters -50%
                                                              40                                       inertial parameters +50%                                                                                                inertial parameters +50%
Hip flexion ( ← ) / extension ( → ) torque (Nm)




                                                                                                                                                                               250
                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   Biceps Femoris force (N)




                                                                                                                                                                               200
                                                               0


                                                              -20                                                                                                              150


                                                              -40
                                                                                                                                                                               100

                                                              -60

                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                              -80


                                                             -100                                                                                                                   0
                                                                    10   20   30   40     50      60     70      80     90        100                                                    10    20    30    40     50      60     70      80     90        100
                                                                                    % of gait cycle                                                                                                         % of gait cycle


Figure 3 A 50% increase (dotted) and 50% decrease (solid) of segment mass and moments of inertia of the subject
has a small effect on joint torques and muscle force which is in agreement with previous findings (Reinbolt et al.,
2007). This illustrates that subject-specific inertial parameters are of minor interest.
Appendix                                                                                   147




References

Anderson, F. C.,Pandy, M. G., 2001. Static and dynamic optimization solutions for gait are
         practically equivalent. Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 153-61.
Chandler, R. F., Clauser, C. E., Mcconville, J. T., Reynolds, H. M.,Young, J. W., 1975.
         Investigation of inertial properties of the human body. Report DOT HS-801430,
         National Technical Information Service, Springfield Virginia 22151, USA.
Delp, S. L., Loan, J. P., Hoy, M. G., Zajac, F. E., Topp, E. L.,Rosen, J. M., 1990. An
         interactive graphics-based model of the lower extremity to study orthopaedic
         surgical procedures. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 37, 757-67.
Fukunaga, T., Roy, R. R., Shellock, F. G., Hodgson, J. A.,Edgerton, V. R., 1996. Specific
         tension of human plantar flexors and dorsiflexors. Journal of Applied Physiology,
         80, 158-65.
Higginson, J. S., Zajac, F. E., Neptune, R. R., Kautz, S. A., Burgar, C. G.,Delp, S. L., 2006.
         Effect of equinus foot placement and intrinsic muscle response on knee extension
         during stance. Gait and Posture, 23, 32-6.
Hurwitz, D. E., Foucher, K. C.,Andriacchi, T. P., 2003. A new parametric approach for
         modeling hip forces during gait. Journal of Biomechanics, 36, 113-9.
Jonker, B. (1988) A finite element dynamic analysis of flexible spatial mechanisms and
         manipulators. Ph.D. Thesis, Delft University of Technology.
Klein Horsman, M. D., Koopman, H. F., Van Der Helm, F. C., Prose, L. P.,Veeger, H. E.,
         2007. Morphological muscle and joint parameters for musculoskeletal modelling
         of the lower extremity. Clinical Biomechanics (Bristol, Avon), 22, 239-47.
Koopman, B. (1989) The three-dimensional analysis and prediction of human walking.
         PhD Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede.
Reinbolt, J. A., Haftka, R. T., Chmielewski, T. L.,Fregly, B. J., 2007. Are patient-specific
         joint and inertial parameters necessary for accurate inverse dynamics analyses of
         gait? IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 54, 782-93.
Van Der Helm, F. C. (1991) The shoulder mechanism, a dynamic approach. Ph.D. Thesis,
         Delft University of Technology.
Van Der Helm, F. C., 1994. A finite element musculoskeletal model of the shoulder
         mechanism. Journal of Biomechanics, 27, 551-69.
Van Soest, A. J., Schwab, A. L., Bobbert, M. F.,Van Ingen Schenau, G. J., 1992. SPACAR:
         a software subroutine package for simulation of the behavior of biomechanical
         systems. Journal of Biomechanics, 25, 1219-26.
Wu, G., Siegler, S., Allard, P., Kirtley, C., Leardini, A., Rosenbaum, D., Whittle, M., D'lima,
         D. D., Cristofolini, L., Witte, H., Schmid, O.,Stokes, I., 2002. ISB
         recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate system of various joints for
         the reporting of human joint motion--part I: ankle, hip, and spine. International
         Society of Biomechanics. Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 543-8.
Summary                                                                                      149




Summary

Orthopedic interventions such as tendon transfers have shown to be successful in the
treatment of gait disorders. Still, in many cases dysfunctions remained or worsened. To
assist clinicians, an interactive tool will be useful that allows evaluation of if-then scenarios
with respect to treatment methods. Comprehensive musculoskeletal models have shown a
high potential to serve as such a tool. By varying anatomical model parameters, alterations
in anatomy due to surgery can be implemented. Inverse and forward model simulations will
provide insight in how respectively movement and muscle activations are affected by
surgery. Yet, a successful application in clinical practice is hampered due to several
shortcomings in existing models.
The output of a model is highly dependent on its anatomical model parameters. Two
shortcomings can be distinguished in the currently available anatomical datasets. Firstly,
existing models were constructed by merging incomplete datasets and estimating missing
parameters. This was done in such a way that model outputs fit with in vivo experimental
data. Although this may be functional, it is not necessarily an accurate representation. The
combined datasets result in an anatomical configuration that never existed. Unknown
interactions between different anatomical parameters are lost and resulting errors and
inconsistencies are inevitable. Secondly, existing datasets are inaccurate at crucial points. In
reality muscles curve around intervening structures, which will affect the line of action of
the muscle. In existing datasets many muscles are defined with only one straight muscle
element. This is an insufficiently accurate discretization of the musculoskeletal system
which has a large effect on model outputs such as muscle force. For example for the
equilibration of joints torques in joints with multiple degrees of freedom in reality only
certain parts of a muscle may be activated in order to avoid unwanted joint torques. These
differentiations within a muscle are not represented with only 1 muscle element, resulting
in an unrealistic estimation of muscle force.
Besides anatomical parameters, the optimization of muscle force to deal with the
redundancy of the musculoskeletal system has several shortcomings. Many models exclude
muscle dynamics in the optimization resulting in unrealistic fast transitions in muscle force.
Secondly, the relation between the load sharing and the used cost functions is not proven.
Many cost functions are only based on muscle force or stress, which excludes the
contribution of smaller muscles. This results in unrealistic muscle synergies.
The goal of this study is to develop and validate a comprehensive inverse-forward dynamic
musculoskeletal model of the lower extremity based on an accurate and consistent
anatomical dataset aiming to evaluate if-then scenarios with respect to the treatment of gait
disorders.
This project started with the collection of a complete and consistent anatomical dataset,
containing the orientations of joints (hip, knee, ankle and subtalar joints), muscle
150                                                                                 Summary



parameters (optimum length, physiological cross sectional area), and geometrical
parameters (attachment sites, ‘via’ points, bony contours). One lower extremity, taken from
a male embalmed specimen, was studied. Position and geometry were measured with a 3D-
digitizer. Optotrak was used for measurement of rotation axes of joints. Sarcomere length
was measured by laser diffraction. A total of 38 muscles were measured. Muscles were
divided in multiple muscle lines of action based on muscle morphology. 14 Ligaments of
the hip, knee and ankle were included. The presented anatomical dataset embraces all
necessary data for state of the art musculoskeletal modelling of the lower extremity.
Implementation of these data into an (existing) model is likely to significantly improve the
estimation of muscle forces and will thus make the use of the model as a clinical tool more
feasible.
With the collected dataset the Twente Lower Extremity Model (TLEM) was constructed.
This two-legged comprehensive musculoskeletal model is described with 21 degrees of
freedom (DOF) and contains 10 joints which are crossed by 264 muscle elements.
The predictions of the model are highly dependent on the accuracy of the moment arms.
Muscle moment arms in the model were calculated as function of the corresponding joint
angles and compared with direct measurements in the literature and other musculoskeletal
models in order to evaluate the validity of the model geometry. In comparison to other
studies, lines of action of the muscles are more extensively represented in the TLEM. The
moment arms presented in this study appeared consistent with the relatively wide range of
data from the literature (typically 2-3 cm). In general differences were smaller than 2 cm.
Since this model is based on accurate measurements of musculoskeletal geometry and its
muscle moment arms fall well within the range found in the literature, the representation of
muscle line of action can be considered trustworthy.
Maximal isometric moments were determined with respect to 6 joint axes of the model
based on full activation of all relevant Hill-type muscle elements in the model over the total
range of motion. Maximal isometric joint moments calculated over the total range of
motion fell within the 95% confidence interval of a number of studies reporting in vivo
measured maximal voluntary moments. These comparisons further increased the
confidence in the anatomical parameters and the model structure. Yet, for the knee
extensors and plantar flexors the reduction of the complex muscle architecture to a Hill
model resulted in eminent deviations with in vivo moments. A morphological instead of
lumped muscle model is required to describe the complex deformations in these muscles.
For the use of the Hill model an adaptation in tendon length was needed to obtain a good
fit.
As a next step, dynamic properties were added to the TLEM and muscle forces were
estimated during gait. Muscle forces were optimized using a novel inverse-forward dynamic
optimization (IFDO) algorithm which takes excitation and activation dynamics into
account. A recently proposed energy related cost function was utilized, which resulted in a
good correspondence with muscle energy consumption. Input joint kinematics during gait
were obtained and used as input for the model. Simulations resulted in a stable, fast and
Summary                                                                                    151



accurate estimation of muscle forces. Measured electromyography (EMG) agreed
reasonably well with neural inputs predicted by the TLEM. Estimated joint compression
forces were consistent with published in vivo measurements of joint forces; differences
were attributed to inter-individual differences in joint torques. This study showed that the
effects of model assumptions are eminent. IFDO prevented unrealistic fast transitions in
force, which were present in other studies that exclude the effect of excitation and
activation dynamics. The energy related cost function induced synergistic muscle activity in
which also small muscles participated since muscle mass and fiber length were included as
weight factor. This is an improvement when compared to traditional cost functions that are
based on muscle force and cross sectional area only. In contrast with other studies, no
merging and tuning of anatomical datasets was required to obtain a good fit with EMG and
in vivo measured compression forces, which further enhances the reliability of the model
predictions.
Finally, the TLEM was applied in a clinical case study. Children with myelomeningocele
frequently develop (sub-)luxated hip joints due to an increased angle between the neck and
the shaft of the femur. More insight in the cause of this deformation would improve
treatment methods such as tendon transfers. It was hypothesized that this femur
deformation is caused by a more vertically oriented hip compression force in
myelomeningocele patients as a result of paralysis of hip abductors. The goal of this study
was to investigate if the force patterns on hip after paralysis are in agreement with this
hypothesis. Stance and gait were measured with a video system in 4 normal children and 4
children with lower lumbo-sacral myelomeningocele. The measured joint angles were used
as model input in order to determine muscle forces, the hip compressive force and the
moments on the physis. Externally measurable segment dimensions, medical history and
the measured EMG signals were used to scale the model to each individual subject. Results
for the normal children were consistent and in agreement with the literature.
Myelomeningocele patients showed a reduced hip abduction moment and in some cases
even adduction moments during gait. It was shown that by including the patient’s
pathological deficiencies in the model, healthy joint torques could not be generated, which
is an indication that the patient is forced to walk the deviated Trendelenburg gait due to
insufficient abduction torque. Abnormal joint torques resulted in abnormal amplitudes of
the compressive force during gait (up to 524 %BW). In general no significant differences in
direction of the hip compression force were found between the normal subject and the
patients, so the hypothesized cause of the femur neck deformities could not be confirmed.
With more extensive scaling routines based on 3D images of bone geometries, femur
deformations of a patient can be included in the model. It is expected that this will result in
a better scaling of the muscle lines of action such that muscle force and hip compression
can be estimated more accurately. This will possibly give more insight in the validity of the
hypothesis.
This study presented a consistent comprehensive musculoskeletal model of the lower
extremity. The added value of this model is that the discretization of the human locomotor
152                                                                              Summary



apparatus is more extensive and more accurate since errors due to merging of datasets are
omitted. Moment arm and maximal isometric moments were in general in agreement with
the literature. Therefore model geometry and force generating properties are considered
trustworthy. A novel muscle force optimization approach was used, resulting in realistic
muscle synergies. The results were in agreement with EMG and in vivo measured
compression force. The collection of more consistent datasets is recommended to obtain
scaling regression equations that relate externally measurable variables with internal
variables. This will allow accurate scaling of the TLEM to a subject, which is a condition
for a successful application in a clinical practice.
Samenvatting                                                                               153




Samenvatting

Orthopedische ingrepen zoals peestransposities zijn succesvol gebleken bij de behandeling
van loopstoornissen. Toch zijn er ook patiënten bij wie klachten aanbleven of verergerden
na een ingreep. Ter ondersteuning van clinici, zou een interactieve ‘tool’ nuttig zijn
waarmee if-then scenario’s kunnen worden geëvalueerd met betrekking tot een
behandelmethode. Zo kan preoperatief inzicht worden verkregen in het effect van de
behandeling. Spierskelet modellen hebben veel potentie voor een dergelijke applicatie.
Door anatomische parameters te variëren in een spierskelet model kan een interventie
worden gesimuleerd. Inverse en voorwaartse modelsimulaties tonen vervolgens het effect
van de ingreep op respectievelijk de activatie patronen van de spieren en de beweging van
de patiënt.
Door verscheidene beperkingen in de huidige spierskelet modellen is een succesvolle
toepassing in de klinische praktijk verhinderd. De uitkomst van een spierskelet model is
sterk afhankelijk van de anatomische parameters. De bestaande anatomische datasets
hebben 2 tekortkomingen. Ten eerste worden bestaande spierskelet modellen samengesteld
door het samenvoegen van verschillende incomplete anatomische datasets en het schatten
van ontbrekende parameters. Dit gebeurt zodanig dat een goede fit ontstaat met in vivo
experimentele data. Hoewel dit functioneel lijkt, is het niet noodzakelijkerwijs een
nauwkeurige representatie van de werkelijkheid. De gecombineerde dataset beschrijft een
anatomische configuratie die in werkelijkheid nooit heeft bestaan. Onbekende interacties
tussen verschillende parameters zijn verloren en fouten en inconsistenties zijn
onvermijdelijk. Een tweede tekortkoming in de bestaande datasets is de onnauwkeurigheid
op cruciale punten. Spieren die in werkelijkheid krommen over tussenliggende structuren
zijn beschreven als rechte lijn elementen wat resulteert in een onnauwkeurige representatie
van de momentsarm ten opzichte van het gewricht. Verder zijn in de huidige datasets veel
spieren beschreven met slechts 1 werklijn. Dit is een onvoldoende nauwkeurige discretisatie
van het mechanische effect van spieren met grote aanhechtingsoppervlakken. Dit heeft een
ongewenst effect op de output van het model. Om bijvoorbeeld gewrichtsmomenten te
compenseren rond een gewricht met meerdere vrijheidsgraden kan in werkelijkheid slechts
een deel van de spier worden geactiveerd. Deze differentiaties in een spier zijn niet
beschreven met slechts 1 spier element, wat resulteert in onrealistische berekening van
spierkracht.
Naast de anatomische parameters zijn er verscheidene tekortkomingen in de optimalisatie
van spierkracht die benodigd is in verband met de redundantie van het systeem. In veel
modellen is de dynamica van de spier buiten beschouwing gelaten in de optimalisatie van
spierkracht wat resulteert in onrealistisch snelle transities in spierkracht. Verder is er geen
bewezen relatie tussen de verdeling van de kracht en de gebruikte optimalisatie criteria.
154                                                                             Samenvatting



Veel van deze criteria zijn alleen gebaseerd op spierkracht of spierspanning wat ertoe leidt
dat kleine spieren geen kracht leveren. Dit resulteert in onrealistische spier-synergieën.
De doelstelling van deze studie is om op basis van een nauwkeurige en consistente dataset
een uitgebreid invers-voorwaarts dynamisch spierskelet model van de onderste extremiteit
te ontwikkelen en te valideren. De uiteindelijke toepassing van dit model is de evaluatie van
if-then scenario’s met betrekking tot de behandeling van loopstoornissen.
Dit project is gestart met het vergaren van een complete en consistente dataset op basis van
dissectie van een onderste extremiteit van een mannelijk gebalsemd specimen. Deze dataset
omvat oriëntaties van gewrichten (heup, knie, enkel en subtalair gewricht), spierparameters
(optimale vezellengtes, fysiologische dwarsdoorsnede), en geometrische parameters
(aanhechtingsplaatsen, ‘via’ punten, botcontouren). Positie en geometrie zijn gemeten met
een 3D-digitiser. Optotrak is gebruikt voor het meten van rotatie-assen van de gewrichten.
Sarcomeerlengte is gemeten met behulp van laserdiffractie. In totaal zijn 38 spieren
gemeten. Iedere spier is opgedeeld in verschillende spierelementen gebaseerd op verschillen
in spiermorfologie. Daarnaast zijn 14 ligamenten van de heup, knie en enkel gemeten. De
resulterende dataset bevat alle benodigde data voor de ontwikkeling van een ‘state of the
art’ spierskelet model van de onderste extremiteit. Het is waarschijnlijk dat het
implementeren van deze data in een (bestaand) model een significante verbetering oplevert
spierkracht optimalisatie, benodigd voor een klinische toepassing.
Met de gemeten dataset is het ‘Twente Lower Extremity Model’ (TLEM) ontwikkeld. Dit
tweebenige uitgebreide spierskelet model van de onderste extremiteit heeft 21
vrijheidsgraden en 10 gewrichten, overspannen door 264 spier elementen.
De uitkomst van een spierskelet model is sterk afhankelijk van de momentsarmen van de
spieren. De momentsarmen van de spieren in het TLEM zijn berekend als functie van de
gewrichtshoeken. Als evaluatie van de validiteit van de geometrie van het model, zijn de
momentsarmen vergeleken met directe metingen uit de literatuur en momentsarmen uit
andere spierskelet modellen. In vergelijking met andere modellen zijn momentsarmen
uitgebreider beschreven in het TLEM. Over het algemeen waren de verschillen met de
literatuur kleiner dan 2 cm. De relatief grote spreiding van momentsarmen per spier
(typisch 2-3 cm) kan worden toegeschreven aan verschil in meetmethodes en individuen.
Omdat het TLEM gebaseerd is op nauwkeurig gemeten anatomische parameters en goed
binnen de range van momentsarmen in de literatuur valt wordt de representatie van de
werklijnen van de spieren beschouwd als betrouwbaar.
Maximale isometrische momenten zijn berekend met het TLEM ten opzichte van 6
gewrichtsassen, gebaseerd op maximale activatie van de desbetreffende Hill spier
elementen. De momenten, berekend over het totale bewegingsbereik, vielen binnen het
95% betrouwbaarheidsinterval van in vivo gemeten momenten bij maximale voluntaire
contractie, zoals gerapporteerd in een aantal studies in de literatuur. Deze resultaten
vergroten de betrouwbaarheid van het model en de bijbehorende anatomische parameters.
Hoewel de reductie van de complexe spier architectuur van de knie extensoren en plantair
flexoren naar een Hill model tot aanzienlijke verschillen met in vivo momenten heeft
Samenvatting                                                                           155



geleid. Een morfologisch model is nodig om de complexe vervormingen in deze spieren te
beschrijven. Voor het gebruik van het Hill model was een aanpassing nodig in de
peeslengte om een goede fit te krijgen.
In een volgende stap in de ontwikkeling zijn dynamische eigenschappen aan het TLEM
toegevoegd. Spierkrachten zijn geoptimaliseerd tijdens het lopen met een invers-voorwaarts
dynamisch optimalisatie (IFDO) algoritme wat rekening houdt met excitatie en activatie
dynamica. Hierbij is een recentelijk ontwikkelt energie gerelateerd criterium gebruikt, die
goed overeenstemt met energie consumptie van de spier. Gewrichtshoeken zijn gemeten en
gebruikt als input voor het model. De resulterende simulaties waren stabiel, snel en
nauwkeurig. Gemeten elektromyografie (EMG) was in goede overeenstemming met de
door het model berekende neurale input van verscheidene spieren. Geoptimaliseerde
compressiekracht in de gewrichten correspondeerden met in vivo gemeten
gewrichtskrachten. Verschillen kunnen worden toegekend aan inter-individuele verschillen
in gewrichtsmomenten. Deze studie heeft laten zien dat verschillen door het effect van
model aannames aanzienlijk zijn. IFDO voorkomt onrealistisch snelle overgangen in
spierkracht die optreden in andere modellen waarbij het effect van spierdynamica buiten
beschouwing wordt gelaten. In het energie gerelateerde optimalisatie criterium worden
spiermassa en vezellengte gewogen wat leidt tot meer realistische spiersynergieën waaraan
ook kleinere spieren deelnemen. Dit is een verbetering in vergelijking met traditionele
optimalisatie criteria die slechts gebaseerd zijn op spierkracht en fysiologische
dwarsdoorsnede. In tegenstelling tot andere modellen was het in de ontwikkeling van het
TLEM niet nodig verschillende datasets samen te voegen om een goede fit met EMG en
compressiekracht te krijgen. Dit vergroot de betrouwbaarheid van de voorspellingen van
het model.
Tot slot is het TLEM toegepast in een klinische studie. Kinderen met myelomeningocele
ontwikkelen (sub-)luxaties in het het heupgewricht ten gevolge van een toename van de
hoek tussen de nek en schacht van het femur. Meer inzicht in de oorzaak van deze
vervormingen zou behandelmethodes zoals peestransposities verbeteren. Er is een
hypothese gesteld dat deze deformaties in myelomeningocele patiënten worden veroorzaakt
door meer verticaal georiënteerde heup compressiekrachten als gevolg van verlamming van
heupabductoren. Het doel van deze studie was om te bepalen of de krachtpatronen op de
heup na verlamming in overeenstemming zijn met deze hypothese. Stand en de gang van 4
gezonde en 4 lage lumbo-sacrale myelomeningocele was gemeten met behulp van een
optisch video systeem en 2 krachtplaten. De gemeten gewrichtshoeken en externe
grondreactiekrachten waren gebruikt als input van het TLEM voor het optimaliseren van
spierkrachten en het berekenen van gewricht compressiekrachten en momenten op de
physis. Extern meetbare segment dimensies, medische geschiedenis en gemeten EMG
signalen waren gebruikt om het TLEM te schalen naar iedere afzonderlijke proefpersoon.
Resultaten voor de gezonde proefpersonen waren consistent en in overeenstemming met
de literatuur. Myelomeningocele patiënten vertoonden een verminderd heup
abductiemoment en in sommige gevallen zelfs een adductiemoment tijdens lopen. Deze
156                                                                            Samenvatting



studie heeft aangetoond dat wanneer de pathologische deficiënties van de patiënt worden
opgenomen in het model, gezonde gewrichtsmomenten niet geleverd kunnen worden. Dit
is een indicatie dat deze patiënten gedwongen worden tot de afwijkende Trendelenburg
gang door een verminderd heupabductie moment. Abnormale gewrichtsmomenten
resulteerden in abnormale amplitudes van de compressiekrachten in het heupgewricht (tot
524 %BW). Er was geen significant verschil aangetroffen in de richting van de heup
compressiekracht in vergelijking met de gezonde proefpersonen, waardoor de hypothese
niet kon worden bevestigd. Met meer uitgebreide schalingsroutines gebaseerd op 3D
afbeeldingen van het femur, kunnen de deformaties in het bot worden meegenomen in het
model. De verwachting is dat dit zal leiden tot een betere schaling van werklijnen van de
spieren zodat de spierkrachten en de heup compressiekracht beter kan worden bepaald. Dit
zal waarschijnlijk meer inzicht geven in de validiteit van de hypothese.
In de huidige studie is een consistent en uitgebreid spierskelet model van de onderste
extremiteit gepresenteerd. De toegevoegde waarde ten opzichte van andere modellen is de
uitgebreidere en nauwkeurige discretisatie van het menselijke bewegingsapparaat waarbij
fouten door samenvoeging van anatomische datasets zijn uitgesloten. Momentsarmen en
maximale isometrische momenten in het model zijn over het algemeen in
overeenstemming met de literatuur. Daarom worden de modelgeometrie en de
krachtseigenschappen betrouwbaar geacht. Er is een nieuwe methode toegepast om
spierkracht te optimaliseren wat resulteerde in realistische spier synergieën. De resultaten
waren in overeenstemming met EMG en in vivo metingen van compressiekrachten in de
heup. Het meten van meer consistente datasets is aanbevolen zodat op basis van
uitgebreide regressie vergelijkingen extern meetbare variabelen kunnen worden gerelateerd
aan interne anatomische parameters. Dit zal leiden tot een nauwkeurigere schaling van het
model, een belangrijke stap richting een succesvolle toepassing in de kliniek.
Dankwoord                                                                                157




Dankwoord

Lezen, plannen, meten, programmeren, simuleren, analyseren, opnieuw doorrekenen,
schrijven, herschrijven….Na 4 jaar werken zit het erop: Mijn proefschrift is klaar!
In dit slotwoord mijn dank aan de mensen die een bijdrage hebben geleverd aan de
totstandkoming van dit boekwerk.

Allereerst wil ik mijn promotoren Frans van der Helm en Bart Koopman bedanken voor
de goede begeleiding.
Frans, ik heb het getroffen met een begeleider die zoveel ervaring heeft met het modelleren
van het bewegingsapparaat. De besprekingen die we om de twee weken hadden, zorgden
iedere keer voor nieuwe motivatie en inspiratie. Je vertouwen in dit project en je grote
gedrevenheid hebben mijzelf en dit onderzoek goed gedaan.
Bart, het feit dat je altijd in de buurt was en open stond voor vragen heeft gezorgd voor
nieuwe impulsen als het even niet liep. Je vermogen om problemen op te lossen of soms
gewoon te relativeren, zijn voor mij belangrijke richtingaanwijzers geweest bij het schrijven
van dit proefschrift. En er was meer dan werken alleen: Beierse oktoberfesten in augustus,
New York Yankees vs. Indians in Cleveland, het eten van gebakken kikkers eten in
Taipei… Heren, het was mij een waar genoegen.

DirkJan Veeger heeft vanuit de Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam een belangrijke bijdrage
geleverd aan mijn onderzoek. DirkJan, ik heb veel van je geleerd in de maanden dat ik aan
het meten was op de snijzaal. Daarnaast heb je door je heldere en kritische blik een
verdiepende bijdrage geleverd aan de artikelen in dit proefschrift. Het was een goede en
leuke samenwerking, bedankt.

Lucian Poliacu Prosé heeft mij de kneepjes van het dissectie vak bijgebracht. Als
werktuigbouwkundige tussen chirurgen en anatomen was ik erg blij met iemand die
werkelijk ieder vezeltje en ligamentje bij voor en achternaam wist te benoemen.
Frans en Erick, de technische stafleden van de snijzaal, hebben gezorgd voor praktische
ondersteuning bij bijzondere meetopstellingen.

Collega’s van de vakgroep wil ik bedanken voor praktische hulp en gezelligheid tijdens
koffiepauzes, borrels, uitjes, sportuitspattingen en congressen.
Paul van Geffen heeft als kamergenoot gezorgd voor de mental support bij de laatste
loodjes. Het was goed vertoeven in kamer W-205 en W-213, bedankt voor de hulp en de
gezelligheid, met als hoogtepunt onze trip naar Taiwan natuurlijk!
En niet te vergeten Bart Verdaasdonk en Miguel Aznar Alonso, mijn roommates in de
eerste 2 jaar van mijn promotie. Maestro’s, het was een leuke tijd!
158                                                                               Dankwoord




Hoewel ik meerdere studenten heb begeleid, wil ik Vera Bulsink en Marieke van Gemert in
het bijzonder bedanken voor de directe bijdrage aan dit proefschrift. Vera heeft de Vicon
metingen uitgevoerd zoals beschreven in hoofdstuk 4 en Marieke heeft gewerkt aan de
eerste klinische toepassing van het model. Dit werk is terug te vinden in hoofdstuk 6.

Mijn paranimfen Bram Zuur en Govertjan de With wil ik bedanken voor de ondersteuning
tijdens de verdediging. Zowel soulmates als biomedisch ingenieur, ik had geen betere
paranimfen kunnen wensen.

Lieve (schoon)familie en vrienden, de momenten samen zijn voor mij erg waardevol. Ik
voel me vereerd met zulke gave mensen om me heen! In het bijzonder wil ik mijn ouders
bedanken. Pap en Mam, hoewel jullie bijdrage aan dit proefschrift niet wetenschappelijk is,
heeft jullie steun door mijn leven ertoe geleid dat dit werk uit mijn handen kon komen.

Tot slot wil ik Geerieke bedanken. Het was behoorlijk bikkelen laatste paar maanden, maar
het is gelukt! Bedankt voor je onvoorwaardelijke liefde en steun. Het heeft me geholpen
om door te zetten als het tegen zat. Daarnaast ben ik blij dat je in de afgelopen 4 jaar
zorgde voor de goede balans tussen werken en ‘inspannende’ ontspanning: Fietsen naar
Rome, sjouwen in Nieuw Zeeland, jungle tracks in Thailand, het was prachtig. Op de fiets
naar Nepal zat er niet in, die houd je nog te goed ☺. Lieve Geerieke, ik zie met veel plezier
uit naar onze verdere levensreis.



Bedankt!
About the Author                                                                        159




About the Author

Martijn Klein Horsman was born in Rijssen, the Netherlands, in 1979. His school
education started at primary school ‘De Driemaster’ in Hasselt from 1983 to 1991.
Subsequently, he went to the ‘Carolus Clusius College’ in Zwolle in 1991, where he
received in 1997 his certificate for ‘preporatory scientific education’ (VWO). In the period
from 1997 to 2003 he studied Mechanical Engineering at the University of Twente. The
subject of his Msc thesis was ‘the estimation of body segment orientation using inertial
sensing’. This research was done at Roessingh Research and Development, Enschede with
prof. dr. Frans van der Helm as supervisor. In 2003 he was employed as PhD student at
the Biomedical Engineering group at the faculty of Engineering Technology of the
University of Twente. This research was conducted under supervision of prof. dr. Frans
van der Helm and prof. dr. ir. Bart Koopman. His research concerns the musculoskeletal
modeling of the lower extremity aiming to assist in the treatment of gait disorders. The
present thesis is the result of this study.
January 2008, Martijn will start with a new challenge in Canada, where he will be working
as postdoctoral researcher in the Human Performance Laboratory at the University of
Calgary.
